

--- PAGE 3 ---

Pain-Wise
Text	Copyright	
©
	2011	David	Kloth,	M.D.,	Andrea	Trescot,	M.D.	and	Francis	Riegler,	M.D.
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced,	stored	in	a	retrieval	system,	or
transmitted,	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,	electronic	or	otherwise,	without	written	permission
from	the	Publisher.
Hatherleigh	Press	is	committed	to	preserving	and	protecting	the	natural	resources	of	the	Earth.
Environmentally	responsible	and	sustainable	practices	are	embraced	within	the	company’s
mission	statement.
Hatherleigh	Press	is	a	member	of	the	Publishers	Earth	Alliance,	committed	to	preserving	and
protecting	the	natural	resources	of	the	planet	while	developing	a	sustainable	business	model	for
the	book	publishing	industry.
This	book	was	edited	and	designed	in	the	village	of	Hobart,	New	York.	Hobart	is	a	community
that	has	embraced	books	and	publishing	as	a	component	of	its	livelihood.	There	are	several
unique	bookstores	in	the	village.	For	more	information,	please	visit	
www.hobartbookvillage.com
.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data	is	available.
eISBN:	978-1-57826-410-0
Cover	design	by	Nick	Macagnone
Interior	design	by	Nick	Macagnone
v3.1

--- PAGE 4 ---

		TABLE	OF	CONTENTS		
Cover
Title	Page
Copyright
Introduction
1				A	Brief	History	of	Pain	Medicine
2				Not	All	Pain	Physicians	Are	the	Same:
Choosing	the	Right	Physician	for	Your	Problem
3				What	to	Expect	from	Interventional	Pain	Management
4				Anatomy:	An	Explanation	of	the	Parts	of	You	That	You	Can’t	See	in
the	Mirror
5				Diagnostic	Testing:
Radiology:	A	Look	Inside	the	Body
Electrodiagnostic	Medicine:	More	Tests	to	Complete	the	Picture
6				Comprehensive	Pain	Therapy:	Other	Pieces	of	the	Puzzle
7				Medications:	So	Much	More	than	Just	Pain	Pills
8				Trigger	Point	Injections:	Treating	Tight	and	Restricted	Muscles
9				Peripheral	Nerve	Blocks:	Injections	in	Other	Places	and	Spaces
10		Epidural	Injections:	Not	Just	for	Childbirth
11		Facet	Injections:	Treating	Arthritis	of	the	Spine
12		Sacroiliac	Injections:	Another	Common	Cause	of	Back	Pain

--- PAGE 5 ---

13		Radiofrequency	Ablation	and	Cryoneuroablation:	Making	the	Pain
Stay	Away
14		Adhesiolysis:	Washing	Away	the	Scar	Tissue
15		Regenerative	Therapy:	Rebuilding	the	Body’s	Normal	Tissue
16		Discography:	A	Better	Look	at	Your	Discs
17		Minimally	Invasive	Disc	Surgery:	When	Less	Is	More
18		Complex	Regional	Pain	Syndrome:	One	Small	Nerve	Causing	Big
Problems
19		Post-Herpetic	Neuralgia	(PHN):	Early	Treatment	Is	the	Key	to
Success
20		Implantable	Techniques:
Spinal	Cord	Stimulation
Spinal	Drug	Delivery	Systems
Peripheral	Nerve/Field	Stimulation
21		Cancer	Pain:	Effective	Control	Is	Usually	Possible
22		Insurance:	Copays,	Coinsurance,	Deductibles,	Oh	My!
23		Workers’	Compensation:	How	It	Works	and	What	to	Do	If	It	Doesn’t
24		Conclusion
Glossary
Online	Resources

--- PAGE 6 ---

		INTRODUCTION		
S
o	you’ve	picked	up	this	book,	which	likely	means	one	of	two	things:
either	you	are	suffering	from	a	condition	that	is	causing	
chronic	pain
,
or	you	are	trying	to	understand	the	pain	of	a	friend	or	loved	one.	We
understand,	and	we’re	here	to	help.	Pain	management	is	one	of	the	most
misunderstood	specialties,	and	it	means	many	different	things	to
different	people.	No	doubt	your	head	is	swimming	with	all	the	treatment
options	being	thrown	at	you.	With	so	many	options	to	choose	from,	you
are	probably	wondering	what	exactly	“pain	management”	is.
Pain	management	is	a	subspecialty	of	many	different	kinds	of	doctors.
You	can	walk	into	the	office	of	a	doctor	who	promotes	himself	or	herself
as	a	pain	management	physician	and	see	a	psychiatrist,	a	
physiatrist
,	a
surgeon,	an	
anesthesiologist
,	a	
chiropractor
,	an	
acupuncturist
,	or	a
variety	of	other	physicians.	In	today’s	world,	all	of	these	different	types
of	physicians	may	call	themselves	pain	management	doctors,	and	so	this
won’t	differentiate	them	from	the	more	highly	skilled	and	trained
physicians	who	practice	the	subspecialty	of	
interventional	pain
management	(IPM)
.	Interventional	pain	physicians	are	experts	at
diagnosing	and	then	treating	chronic	pain	conditions	using	precision-
guided	injections	or	minimally	invasive	therapies.	The	types	of
physicians	that	may	perform	interventional	pain	management	most
commonly	include	anesthesiologists	and	physiatrists,	but	interventional
pain	management	treatments	are	also	performed	by	many	other
specialists,	including	radiologists,	
neurologists,	neurosurgeons,
orthopedists
,	and	general	practitioners.	In	some	areas,	a	nurse
practitioner	or	a	physician	assistant	may	perform	these	procedures	(a
practice	which	deeply	concerns	the	authors	of	this	book).
The	complexity	of	different	treatments	and	multitude	of	providers
means	that	there	is	a	great	deal	of	variability	in	the	level	of	training	and
quality	of	care.	A	patient,	therefore,	must	become	an	active	participant
in	his	or	her	own	care.	You	must	be	knowledgeable	about	your	choices.
Finding	a	doctor	who	will	meet	your	needs	and	expectations	requires	at

--- PAGE 7 ---

least	as	much	research	as	buying	a	car.	You	wouldn’t	walk	into	a	car
dealership	without	knowing	what	kind	of	car	you	needed,	what	a
reasonable	price	might	be	for	that	car,	and	what	you	should	expect	from
your	new	vehicle.	In	the	same	way,	you	should	walk	into	a	pain
management	office	knowing	what	type	of	doctor	you’re	seeing,	what	his
or	her	qualifications	are,	and	what	type	of	treatment	you	can	expect.	It	is
important	that	you	understand	the	differences	among	providers	so	you
can	select	the	type	of	physician	to	best	treat	your	particular	pain
problem.
The	authors	of	this	book	strongly	believe	that	the	practice	of
interventional	pain	management	is	the	practice	of	medicine	and	must
only	be	performed	by	properly	trained	physicians	and	never	by	an
independently	practicing	nurse	or	physician	assistant.	Interventional
pain	management	physicians	require	extensive	training	to	become
proficient;	the	procedures	are	complex	and	can	be	very	risky	if	not
performed	properly,	so	it	is	necessary	that	the	physician	has	the	proper
background	and	training.	The	advice	offered	in	this	book	comes	from
physicians	who	are	actively	practicing	interventional	pain	management
doctors.	Interventional	pain	management	is	a	specialty	that	focuses	on
determining	the	cause	of	symptoms	and	applying	treatment	options	to
manage	and	alleviate	chronic	pain.	We	are	not	simply	generic	“pain
management”	doctors.	Interventional	pain	management	physicians	have
a	specific	skill	set,	which	will	be	explained	in	detail	as	this	book
progresses.	We	hope	that	this	book	will	assist	you	in	differentiating
between	the	various	interventional	pain	therapies	and	help	guide	you	in
both	selecting	a	physician	and	learning	about	the	various	treatment
options	available	today.
This	book	will	begin	with	the	basics	and	will	then	move	to	more
complex	concepts	and	treatments	as	it	progresses.	We	have	tried	to
include	the	more	common	treatments	used	today,	but	by	no	means	is
this	meant	to	represent	all	possible	therapies	that	are	available.	While
we	encourage	you	to	read	the	whole	book,	please	at	least	review	the
initial	chapters	which	discuss	important	concepts	that	are	relevant	to	all
conditions	(you	may	wish	to	use	other	parts	of	the	book	more	as	a
reference).	We	encourage	you	to	refer	back	to	this	book	as	you	progress
with	treatment	as	we	believe	that	you	will	find	it	to	be	a	valuable
resource	as	you	work	with	your	doctor	to	improve	your	pain	and

--- PAGE 8 ---

function.
Note:
All	Glossary	terms	are	marked	in
bold
	throughout	the	text	for	easy
reference.

--- PAGE 9 ---

CHAPTER	1
A	BRIEF	HISTORY
OF	PAIN	MEDICINE
P
ain	management	or	pain	medicine	is	the	branch	of	medicine	devoted
to	the	relief	of	pain	and	to	improving	the	function	and	quality	of	life	for
those	patients	living	in	
chronic	pain
.	Although	pain	is	a	condition
suffered	by	all	creatures,	the	medical	specialty	of	pain	management	is
surprisingly	new.
Perhaps	the	earliest	reference	to	pain	intervention	is	described	in	the
book	of	Genesis	in	the	Bible	when	God	put	Adam	into	a	deep	sleep	in
order	to	remove	his	rib	to	make	Eve.	Ancient	cultures	were	well	aware
of	the	pain-relieving	properties	of	plants;	Egyptian	papyrus	records	from
3000	BC	described	the	use	of	poppy	juice	(opium)	to	treat	pain.	Chinese
and	other	Eastern	cultures	identified	pain	points	throughout	the	body
and	ultimately	developed	
acupuncture
	therapy.	Early	Greek
philosophers	such	as	Plato	recognized	that	the	brain	was	the	site	of	pain
perception	and	showed	its	connection	to	the	peripheral	nervous	system.
In	1170	AD,	the	first	book	of	Western	surgery	provides	descriptions	of
sponges	soaked	in	opium	held	over	the	patient’s	nose	for	surgical	pain
relief.	Morphine	was	isolated	from	opium	in	1806,	the	needle	and
syringe	for	hypodermic	injections	were	developed	in	1839,	and	ether
was	first	used	in	1846	to	provide	pain	relief	during	surgery.
Cocaine,	isolated	from	cocoa	leaves	from	South	America,	was
identified	as	a	local	anesthetic	in	1860	and	was	used	in	nerve	blocks
soon	afterwards.	During	the	Civil	War,	which	saw	the	first	use	of	high-
velocity	bullets,	physicians	noticed	that	injury	to	nerves	caused	pain	that
seemed	out	of	proportion	to	the	injury	itself.	
Causalgia
	(now	known	as

--- PAGE 10 ---

complex	regional	pain	syndrome
	type	II),	from	the	Greek	word
meaning	“burning,”	was	described	by	Weir-Mitchell	in	1864.
In	the	late	19th	century,	using	the	newly	developed	hypodermic
needles,	cocaine	and	later	pure	alcohol	were	injected	on	nerves	to
provide	pain	relief	during	surgery,	after	injury,	and	for	cancer	patients.
Novocain
®
	(procaine),	a	local	anesthetic	that	is	not	addictive,	does	not
cause	euphoric	effects,	and	is	not	related	to	cocaine,	was	developed	in
1904.	World	War	I	(1914	to	1918)	and	World	War	II	(1939	to	1945)
provided	ample	opportunity	to	use	this	new	knowledge	to	treat	pain.
Patients	suffering	from	trauma,	frostbite,	and	
phantom-limb	pain
,	as
well	as	neuropathic	pain	syndromes	like	causalgia,	underwent	injections
of	the	safer	local	anesthetics	that	by	then	had	largely	replaced	cocaine.
It	was	during	World	War	II	that	an	army	surgeon	by	the	name	of	John
Bonica	started	a	multidisciplinary	approach	to	pain	management	on
veterans	with	chronic	pain,	which	drew	attention	to	the	under-treatment
of	pain	in	general	and	chronic	pain	in	particular.	His	intellectual
approach	and	organized	medicine	efforts,	as	well	as	his	1953	publication
of	the	first	comprehensive	book	on	pain	management,	
The	Management
of	Pain
,	led	to	his	universally	recognized	role	in	history	as	the	founder	of
modern	pain	management.	John	Bonica	worked	at	the	University	of
Washington	in	Seattle	after	World	War	II,	and	his	efforts	inspired	the
founding	of	the	International	Association	for	the	Study	of	Pain	(IASP)	in
1973	and	the	American	Pain	Society	(APS)	in	1977.
By	the	late	1980s,	it	became	clear	that	pain	could	be	treated	not	only
by	oral	medications	but	also	by	the	delivery	of	specific	medications	to
specific	structures	via	injection.	In	medicine,	there	are	radiologists	who
look	at	x-rays	and	interventional	radiologists	who	use	x-rays	to	direct
needles	to	specific	structures	to	obtain	tissue	for	diagnosis;	there	are
cardiologists
	who	read	EKGs	and	prescribe	blood	pressure	medicines
and	interventional	cardiologists	who	use	
catheterization
	and	x-rays	to
open	up	blood	vessels	and	insert	stents.	Borrowing	that	concept,	in	1990
Steve	Waldman	coined	the	term	
“interventional	pain	management”
	to
distinguish	medication	management	of	pain	from	injection	therapy.	The
first	textbook	on	interventional	pain,	
Interventional	Pain	Management
	by
Steven	Waldman	and	Alon	Winnie,	was	published	in	1995.	Early	in	the
field’s	development,	the	majority	of	physicians	choosing	to	specialize	in
pain	management	were	anesthesiologists	and	most	training	programs	are

--- PAGE 11 ---

still	under	the	auspices	of	anesthesia	departments.	Because	of	this
history,	the	American	Society	of	Anesthesiologists	(ASA)	has	played	a
large	role	in	this	field	and	many	of	the	interventional	pain	management
techniques	being	used	today	were	developed	by	anesthesiologists.	By	
the
late	1990s,	many	anesthesiologists	began	to	leave	the	practice	of
operative	anesthesia	and	focus	instead	on	full-time	interventional	pain
medicine.	At	around	the	same	time,	doctors	from	other	specialties	such
as	radiology,	neurology,	and	physical	medicine	and	rehabilitation	also
began	to	practice	full-time	interventional	pain	medicine.
The	American	Academy	of	Pain	Medicine	(AAPM)	was	established	in
1985	as	a	multi-specialty	physician	pain	society.	The	International	Spine
Intervention	Society	(ISIS)	was	established	in	1993	as	an	association	of
physicians	interested	in	the	development,	implementation,	and
standardization	of	
percutaneous
	(delivered	through	the	skin)
techniques	with	precision	diagnosis	of	spinal	pain.	In	1998,	the
American	Society	of	Interventional	Pain	Physicians	(ASIPP)	was	formed
to	preserve,	advance,	and	promote	the	development	and	practice	of	safe,
high-quality,	and	cost-effective	IPM	techniques.
The	American	Board	of	Anesthesiologists	(ABA)	gave	the	first	specialty
certification	examination	in	pain	medicine	to	anesthesiologists	in	1993;
the	American	Board	of	Pain	Medicine	(ABPM)	began	to	administer	a
pain	board	certification	available	to	multiple	specialties	in	1995.	The
United	States	Congress	established	the	specialty	designation	of
interventional	pain	management,	separate	from	anesthesia,	in	2003.
In	2006,	the	American	Board	of	Interventional	Pain	Physicians
(ABIPP)	developed	a	board	certification	specifically	for	interventional
pain	physicians,	which	includes	a	written	exam,	an	oral	exam,	and	a
practical	exam	(on	a	cadaver)	to	evaluate	the	various	components	of	a
pain	physician’s	training.	ABIPP	also	tests	for	training	in	the	proper	use
and	management	of	controlled	substances	as	well	as	practice
management	as	it	relates	to	rules,	regulations,	and	billing	activities.
Today,	this	stands	as	the	most	comprehensive	exam	for	testing
interventional	pain	physicians.
In	June	of	2011,	the	Institute	of	Medicine,	a	federal	agency,	released	a
legislatively	commissioned	report	which	describes	the	massive	economic
impact	of	chronic	pain	which	costs	this	nation	more	than	heart	disease
in	medical	bills,	sick	days,	and	lost	productivity.	The	report	also

--- PAGE 12 ---

comments	on	the	barriers	to	accessing	proper	pain	management
therapies	which	include	inadequate	research,	insurance	that	does	not
cover	complex	care,	and	health	workers	not	adequately	trained	to	handle
pain	issues.
While	it	is	true	that	virtually	every	patient	who	visits	a	doctor
complains	of	pain,	specialty	training	and	certification	in	pain	
medicine	is
really	barely	20	years	old—a	youngster	when	compared	to	the
specialties	of	internal	medicine	or	surgery.	Hopefully,	all	physicians	will
someday	be	required	to	undergo	training	in	pain	medicine	prior	to
graduation	from	medical	school.	Until	then,	it	is	important	for	patients
to	understand	the	training	and	credentials	of	their	potential	pain
physician.
When	looking	for	a	physician,	you	may	find	that	some	specialize	in
one	or	more	aspects	of	pain	treatment.	Some	may	just	prescribe
medications,	some	just	do	injections,	some	may	do	counseling,	others
only	manipulate	parts	of	the	body,	and	others	will	provide	a
combination	of	these	approaches.	We	suggest	that	you	select	a	physician
who	has	the	proper	training	and	background	for	the	care	that	you
require,	and	who	dedicates	at	least	50%	of	his	or	her	professional
practice	to	the	treatment	of	pain.	It	is	important	to	understand	what
services	your	doctor	can	provide	and	whether	he	or	she	works	with
other	doctors	or	health	care	professionals	who	offer	other	components	of
pain	management	so	that	you	have	access	to	the	full	spectrum	of	pain
care.

--- PAGE 13 ---

CHAPTER	2
NOT	ALL	PAIN	PHYSICIANS
ARE	THE	SAME
I
f	you	or	a	loved	one	suffers	from	
chronic	pain
,	you’re	probably	wary
of	seeing	yet	another	doctor.	In	the	search	for	pain	relief,	the	true	pain
specialist	usually	is	not	consulted	until	the	patient	has	exhausted	every
other	option,	including	practitioners	of	other	disciplines	that	often
market	themselves	as	“pain	specialists,”	such	as	
chiropractors
	and
massage	therapists.	Many	patients—and	unfortunately,	even	many
doctors—do	not	understand	the	difference	between	the	different	types	of
pain	providers.	This	is	surprising	and	not	necessarily	the	way	it	should
be,	but	this	is	the	way	it	is	for	most	patients.
All	too	often	patients	are	told	that	everything	that	can	be	done	for
their	problem	has	been	done.	But	they	still	have	unrelieved	pain.
Patients	are	often	told	other	treatment	alternatives	are	too	risky	or	are
unlikely	to	help	them.	If	the	doctor	can’t	figure	out	what	is	causing	the
pain,	he	or	she	may	begin	to	think	the	patient	is	making	up	the
symptoms	for	secondary	gain	(money,	insurance,	drugs,	etc.),	or	the
doctor	may	take	what	has	become	the	easy	way	out	and	diagnose	the
pain	as	fibromyalgia.	Although	fibromyalgia	is	a	real	condition,	it	has
recently	become	a	catch-all	diagnosis	for	patients	with	pain	that	isn’t
easily	explained,	and	some	doctors	find	it	easier	to	attach	this	label	than
look	for	what	might	be	a	treatable	cause	of	pain.
The	most	important	part	of	any	pain	treatment	is	making	the	right
diagnosis.	How	can	you	treat	the	problem	if	you	don’t	know	what	is
wrong?	For	instance,	taking	out	the	appendix	may	be	a	great	surgery	for
belly	pain,	unless	the	problem	is	your	gall	bladder.	Pain	that	persists

--- PAGE 14 ---

beyond	a	reasonable	period	of	time	and	continues	despite	some	initial
treatment	will	likely	require	more	precise	evaluation	by	a	physician	who
specializes	in	the	diagnosis	and	treatment	of	pain.	Pain	
specialists	have
been	trained	to	find	the	specific	cause	of	pain	by	using	your	history,
physical	findings,	various	radiologic	and	laboratory	studies,	and	often
specific	and	highly	targeted	injections	to	determine	the	exact	cause	of
your	pain.
The	answer	is	rarely	just	to	take	another	pill	or	to	increase	the	current
medications;	rather,	it	is	best	to	identify	and	treat	the	specific	underlying
cause.	Your	bank	account	also	probably	needs	help,	because	you	have
spent	yourself	silly	trying	everything	else	along	the	way.	By	this	point,
the	pain	has	likely	also	affected	your	work,	or	perhaps	you	haven’t	been
able	to	work	because	of	the	pain.	Pain	can	have	a	dramatically	negative
effect	on	normal	activities	and	can	limit	many	aspects	of	life	that	you
enjoy.	Chronic	pain	also	often	causes	moodiness	and	depression,	which
are	real	consequences	for	your	mental	health	and	which	will	affect	your
interactions	with	others.
You	are	in	pain,	tired,	frustrated,	poorer,	angry,	and	suspicious	of	“yet
another	doctor,”	so	you	need	to	make	sure	that,	if	you	are	going	to	make
the	effort	to	see	a	pain	specialist,	it	is	someone	who	is	competent	and
appropriate	for	your	problem.	But	it	is	often	not	as	easy	as	checking	the
Yellow	Pages	under	“pain	specialist.”	Unfortunately,	sometimes	you
don’t	have	a	choice	of	doctors	because	your	insurance	company	limits
your	choices,	or	your	regular	medical	doctor	may	not	know	where	to
direct	you	for	this	highly	specialized	care.
Within	the	next	few	pages,	we	will	explore	the	differences	between
different	kinds	of	doctors	who	specialize	in	pain	management	so	that
you	can	find	a	doctor	who	can	help	you	figure	out	the	cause	of	your
symptoms	and	develop	an	effective	treatment	plan	to	help	control	or
manage	the	pain.	You	will	note	that	we	did	not	use	the	word	“cure,”	as
this	may	or	may	not	be	an	achievable	goal,	depending	on	your	particular
condition	(for	more	about	managing	expectations,	see	
chapter	3
).
Choosing	the	Right	Physician	for	Your	Problem
At	the	beginning	of	this	book,	you	learned	that	interventional	pain
physicians	can	come	from	different	specialty	backgrounds.	That	is

--- PAGE 15 ---

because	
interventional	pain	management
	is	a	“hybrid”	specialty	that
developed	from	various	other	specialties.	Unfortunately,	IPM	is	such	a
new	field	that	there	isn’t	a	specific	residency	training	program	that
targets	this	medical	specialty,	so	all	physicians	who	work	in	the	pain
field	have	gone	through	training	in	another	field	of	medicine	first.
Today,	if	a	bright	young	medical	student	wants	to	practice	IPM,	he	or
she	has	to	do	an	internship,	then	a	residency	in	another	specialty,	and
only	then	can	he	or	she	can	finally	do	formal	training	in	IPM	through	a
fellowship	or	post-residency	training.
Some	physicians	have	been	practicing	pain	management	so	long	that
their	training	predates	formal	fellowships,	which	have	only	existed	since
the	early	1990s.	Some	clinicians	entered	IPM	later	in	their	career	via	a
different	specialty.	Some	of	these	clinicians	have	had	proper	training,
and	others	call	themselves	specialists	merely	because	they	have	attended
a	weekend	course	or	two.	Unfortunately,	many	physicians	claim	to	be
pain	specialists	(or	attempt	to	perform	pain	procedures)	despite	the	lack
of	any	formal	training	in	this	field	of	medicine.	The	true	pain	specialist
has	spent	extensive	time	studying	this	complex	and	rapidly	evolving
specialty.	In	fact,	the	work	is	so	specific	and	the	developments	so	rapid
that	it	is	the	rare	physician	who	can	split	his	or	her	time	between
performing	IPM	and	working	in	another	area	of	medical	practice.
Besides	asking	about	formal	training	in	pain	management,	you	can
check	what	board	certifications	your	physician	holds.	This	will	give	you
information	about	their	level,	and	type,	of	training.	It	is	important	to
understand	the	different	types	of	board	certifications	that	are	available
for	pain	doctors.	The	most	rigorous	of	these	examinations	is	also	perhaps
one	of	the	most	intensive	and	in-depth	examination	processes	in
medicine	today.	This	exam	was	developed	by	the	American	Society	of
Interventional	Pain	Physicians	(ASIPP),	a	specialty	society	of	physicians
practicing	IPM.	Once	the	physician	passes	this	examination,	he	or	she
becomes	a	“diplomate”	of	the	American	Board	of	Interventional	Pain
Physicians	(ABIPP).
So	what	else	is	out	there?	The	only	certification	officially	accepted	by
the	American	Board	of	Medical	Specialties	(ABMS)	at	this	time	is	the
American	Board	of	Anesthesiologists	(ABA)	“certificate	of	added
qualifications”	in	pain	management.	The	ABA	gave	its	first	examination
in	1993.	Now	two	other	specialties—physical	medicine	and

--- PAGE 16 ---

rehabilitation	(PM&R)	and	neurology/psychiatry—are	allowed	to	take
the	same	examination.	This	exam	tests	for	general	knowledge	in	a
variety	of	areas	of	pain	medicine	but	does	not	thoroughly	test	the	IPM
physician’s	knowledge	of	interventional	techniques.	Today,	the	number
of	
anesthesiologists
	with	pain	certification	is	much	greater	than	the
other	fields.	That	is	partly	because	anesthesiologists	originally	were	the
only	ones	who	could	take	the	examination	and	also	because
anesthesiologists	were	the	first	specialists	to	provide	the	injection
treatments	that	are	part	of	IPM	today.
However,	a	certificate	of	added	qualifications	doesn’t	actually	certify
physicians	to	perform	IPM;	rather,	it	tests	only	their	general	
pain
knowledge.	This	is	important	too,	and	so	is	still	required	as	the	first	part
of	the	ABIPP	exam,	but	it	doesn’t	adequately	test	physicians’	practical
and	technical	proficiency	in	IPM.	Nevertheless,	this	was	the	closest	thing
to	certification	in	pain	management	until	just	a	few	years	ago.	That’s
when	the	American	Board	of	Interventional	Pain	Physicians	(ABIPP)	was
formed	to	more	properly	and	fully	test	the	IPM	specialist.	At	around	the
same	time,	the	World	Institute	of	Pain	(WIP),	an	international
organization,	began	giving	oral	and	practical	(cadaver)	exams	in	IPM	to
establish	clinical	and	technical	proficiency	in	IPM.	Those	who	completed
the	examination	process	were	awarded	a	Fellow	of	Interventional	Pain
Practice	(FIPP)	certificate.	Working	with	WIP,	ABIPP	initially	used	this
certification	to	count	toward	the	second	part	of	the	ABIPP	exam,	but
ABIPP	recently	developed	their	own	format	for	this	portion	of	the
examination	process.	ABIPP	has	two	other	important	components	to	its
examination	process:	a	test	on	controlled	substance	management	and
another	on	compliance,	documentation,	and	coding.
You	can	see	that	a	physician	who	is	certified	by	ABIPP	is	a	rare
physician	who	has	gone	through	an	extremely	intensive	board
examination	process	that	includes	at	least	five	written	exams,	an	oral
exam,	and	a	practical	exam	that	requires	the	applicant	to	demonstrate
his	or	her	clinical	skills	on	a	cadaver	in	front	of	two	examiners.	If	your
doctor	is	ABIPP	certified,	he	or	she	is	one	of	the	few	physicians	willing
to	prove	their	skill	as	an	interventional	pain	physician.	ABIPP	is	not	yet
a	Member	Board	of	the	American	Board	of	Medical	Specialties.	ABMS	is
the	oldest	and	most	prestigious	organization	of	medical	specialty	boards.
Pain	management	has	a	toehold	at	ABMS	via	the	certificates	issued	by

--- PAGE 17 ---

certain	member	boards.	But	ABIPP	hopes	to	elevate	pain	management	to
the	level	of	having	its	own	board.
If	you	have	an	ABIPP-certified	pain	doctor,	then	you	can	feel	confident
that	you’ve	found	someone	who	has	the	skill	and	knowledge	to	help	you
with	your	chronic	pain.	But	what	if	you	can’t	find	someone	who	is	ABIPP
certified?	Unfortunately,	that	is	going	to	be	the	usual	circumstance	for	at
least	a	few	more	years.	Today,	there	are	less	than	500	ABIPP	certified
doctors,	but	bear	in	mind	this	is	a	new	process;	hopefully,	the	numbers
will	continue	to	grow.
So	how	do	you	know	if	a	specific	doctor	has	the	skills	to	help	you?
There	are	a	couple	of	ways	to	size	up	your	doctor.	First	of	all,	don’t	be
afraid	to	ask	questions.	Here	are	some	key	criteria,	listed	in	order	of
importance,	to	help	you	evaluate	your	physician:
Certification
.	Does	the	doctor	hold	a	certificate	in	pain	management
from	any	board?	You	can	go	to	the	American	Board	of	Medical
Specialties	(ABMS)	website	(
www.abms.org
)	to	see	if	your	doctor	is
ABMS	certified	and	if	they	hold	a	specialty	certificate	in	pain
management	from	an	ABMS	member	board.	If	you	want	to	confirm
that	your	doctor	has	an	ABIPP	certificate,	check	their	website
(
www.abipp.org
).
Training
.	Where	did	the	doctor	do	his	or	her	residency?	In	what
specialty?	Did	he	or	she	do	a	fellowship	in	pain	management?
Level	of	involvement
.	Ideally,	your	doctor	practices	pain	management
or	IPM	full	time.
Credentials
.	Does	your	doctor	have	credentials	at	a	local	hospital	or
surgery	center	to	practice	interventional	pain	management?	You	can
easily	check	with	the	hospital	or	local	surgery	center.	Credentialing
is	different	from	board	certification,	but	if	a	hospital	or	surgical
center	has	granted	the	physician	privileges,	they	have	theoretically
checked	at	least	for	basic	competence—although	we	caution	you
that	this	may	not	always	be	the	case.	It	is	still	possible	in	certain
places	to	get	credentials	to	practice	IPM	without	being	board
certified	or	even	properly	trained.
Experience
.	How	long	has	the	doctor	been	practicing	IPM—not	just
practicing	medicine	but	practicing	pain	management	in	general	and
IPM	in	particular?	Is	his	or	her	whole	practice	dedicated	to	pain

--- PAGE 18 ---

management,	or	does	he	or	she	just	dabble	in	the	field?	Given	the
complexity	of	this	field,	a	true	pain	physician	should	dedicate	at
least	50%	of	their	professional	time	to	practicing	pain	management.
Society	membership	and	meeting	attendance
.	One	of	the	ways	that
doctors	stay	current	in	their	field	is	to	attend	meetings	where	they
can	learn	and	network	with	other	doctors	in	their	specialty.	Because
IPM	is	a	rapidly	changing	field,	it	is	critical	for	your	doctor	to	stay
current,	and	the	societies	and	meetings	are	a	good	source	of	new
information.
Peer	recommendation
.	Your	other	physicians	may	be	able	to	give	you
a	referral	to	a	physician	who	specializes	in	pain	management.
Unfortunately,	this	may	be	the	least	reliable	method,	because	some
referring	physicians	may	not	understand	the	differences	in	pain
medicine	training	that	we	discussed	earlier.

--- PAGE 19 ---

CHAPTER	3
WHAT	TO	EXPECT	FROM
INTERVENTIONAL	PAIN
MANAGEMENT
C
hronic	pain
,	back	problems,	neck	problems,	disc	
degeneration
,
headaches,	and	pelvic	pain	are	all	identifiable	diseases	and	must	be
treated	as	such.	The	goal	of	
interventional	pain	management
procedures	should	be	to	reduce	and	manage	pain,	with	emphasis	on	the
word	“manage.”	Your	physician	may	not	necessarily	be	able	to	cure	the
problem,	but	they	can	help	you	control	the	pain	and	maximize	your
functional	level.	Although	the	ideal	goal	may	be	to	completely	resolve
the	issue	and	the	associated	pain,	this	is	often	not	realistically	possible.
This	is	also	true	for	the	majority	of	other	chronic	health	problems.	When
the	
pancreas
	does	not	secrete	
insulin
,	patients	are	diagnosed	with
diabetes	and	treated	with	insulin	for	the	rest	of	their	lives;	chronic	heart
conditions	are	treated	on	an	ongoing	basis	with	heart	medications,	and
so	on.	Chronic	pain	similarly	may	require	intermittent	or	continual
treatment.	When	patients	have	bad	
discs
	that	are	severely	degenerated
and	then	develop	chronic	back	pain,	they	will	likely	require	intermittent
treatment	for	the	rest	of	their	life.	It	is	important	to	have	a	conversation
with	your	pain	physician	so	that	you	can	ask	him	or	her	to	explain	what
can	and	cannot	be	achieved	with	a	particular	injury	or	degree	of
damage.	And	don’t	let	anyone	tell	you	that	surgery	will	cure;	even	when
it	fixes	what	it	intends,	it	can	cause	significant	problems	to	adjacent
structures.	This	is	true	if	it	is	your	back	or	knee	(or	any	body	part).
While	some	conditions	can	be	cured,	most	are	managed	to	provide
long-term	control.	Realistic	expectations	are	extremely	important	and

--- PAGE 20 ---

should	be	agreed	upon	in	advance	with	your	doctor.	If	a	patient	expects
to	be	100%	cured	and	this	does	not	occur,	he	or	
she	will	obviously	be
disappointed.	If	the	doctor’s	and	the	patient’s	expectations	are	radically
different,	neither	will	be	satisfied	with	the	outcome.	When	both	parties
are	trying	to	achieve	a	50%	to	70%	reduction	in	pain	and	that	goal	is
reached,	both	parties	will	be	happy.	The	role	of	the	pain	management
physician	is	often	to	manage	the	pain	as	completely	as	possible	while
recognizing	that	all	the	pain	may	not	be	eliminated.
So	when	is	enough	treatment	enough?	The	answer	is	actually	quite
simple:	when	you	reach	a	point	where	the	pain	level	is	tolerable.	This
varies	from	patient	to	patient.	In	a	successful	outcome,	pain	only
minimally	interferes	with	the	activities	of	daily	living,	and	symptoms	are
adequately	controlled	with	either	no	medication	or	very	low	dosages.	It
is	often	difficult	to	determine	when	the	patient	is	as	good	as	he	or	she	is
going	to	get	and	when	to	stop	performing	procedures.	We	frequently	see
patients	whose	backs	and	discs	are	damaged	so	severely	that	we	have
limited	options	to	control	the	symptoms.	For	example,	patients	who	have
had	multiple	previous	surgeries	or	who	have	multilevel	damage	rarely
respond	to	further	surgery.	In	these	situations,	we	try	to	control	the
acute	problems,	the	most	severe	pain,	and	then	control	other	remaining
symptoms	until	they’re	tolerable.
In	this	book,	we	have	provided	you	with	a	basic	understanding	of	the
various	treatment	options	that	exist	today	for	both	diagnosing	and
treating	pain.	There	are	many	options	available	to	relieve	chronic	pain,
but	they	all	rely	on	first	finding	the	correct	diagnosis.	Don’t	be	afraid	to
ask	your	doctor	questions	that	they	may	not	have	covered.	Finding	the
right	physician	with	the	proper	training	is	a	great	start.	Going	through
the	proper	diagnostic	evaluations	and	procedures	will	help	to	identify
the	specific	causes	of	your	pain.	Although	your	pain	physicians	will
likely	not	promise	you	100%	relief,	they	should	offer	to	help	reduce	your
pain,	improve	your	functioning,	and	help	you	return	to	a	more	normal
daily	life.
Before	Your	First	Appointment:
1
.	
Complete	any	paperwork	the	doctor	requires.	Many	practices	have
lengthy	questionnaires	for	new	patients,	and	you	may	be	asked	to

--- PAGE 21 ---

fill	one	out	before	you	can	be	seen.	Take	your	time	and	answer	the
questions	thoughtfully.	Some	of	the	questions	may	seem	irrelevant,
but	your	answers	help	the	doctor	to	understand	your	problem	and
how	it	affects	your	life,	and	to	determine	what	treatments	are	most
suitable	for	you.
2
.	
Bring	the	results	from	any	MRI	or	
CT	scans
	you	have	had.	These
results	include	a	written	report	from	the	radiologist	who	originally
read	the	scan	as	well	as	a	copy	of	the	pictures	themselves.	These
pictures	can	be	actual	films	or	on	CD.	In	many	cases,	your	pain
management	physician	needs	to	see	these	pictures	before	he	or	she
can	come	up	with	a	treatment	plan.	You	will	save	yourself	time	if
you	bring	the	films	to	your	first	appointment.	The	saying	“a	picture
is	worth	a	thousand	words”	is	also	true	in	evaluating	your
condition.
3
.	
Bring	your	insurance	card	and	picture	ID.
4
.	
Make	sure	that	you	understand	your	insurance	plan	and	how	much
you	will	be	expected	to	pay	at	your	first	visit.	For	most	people,	this
will	mean	that	you	will	need	to	pay	a	copay.	Be	prepared	to	make
this	payment.	If	you	don’t	carry	cash,	make	sure	the	office	takes
checks	or	credit	cards.
5
.	
If	your	insurance	plan	requires	a	primary-care	physician	referral,
make	sure	one	is	in	place.
6
.	
Wear	comfortable	clothing	that	is	easy	to	remove.	During	your	first
visit,	a	neurologic	exam	may	be	performed.	For	example,	if	you
have	back	pain	that	radiates	into	your	legs,	testing	may	be	done	on
your	legs	and	feet.	Wear	shoes	that	come	off	easily	to	make	the
experience	easier	for	you.
7
.	
Bring	any	relevant	medical	records.	If	another	physician	sent	you	to
the	pain	management	office,	that	physician	should	have	sent	all	the
necessary	records.	Trust	but	verify:	check	to	make	sure	the	records
arrived	in	advance;	if	they	have	not,	do	your	best	to	obtain	all
relevant	records	and	bring	them	with	you	to	your	first	appointment.
Before	Any	Procedure:
1
.	
Make	your	doctor	aware	of	all	medications	you’re	taking.	Some
heart	medications	are	
blood	thinners
	and	will	increase	the	risk	of

--- PAGE 22 ---

bleeding	complications.
2
.	
If	you	are	diabetic,	you	must	tell	your	physician	ahead	of	time.
Insulin-dependent	diabetics	will	have	to	follow	specific	protocols
before	and	after	any	injection.	If	you	are	having	your	procedure
with	sedation,	you	will	need	to	fast	before	the	procedure,	and	you
should	bring	your	insulin	with	you	to	the	procedure.	Steroids	can
increase	your	blood	sugar	and	so	you	may	need	to	work	with	
your
diabetic	doctor	to	adjust	your	dosages	as	indicated.
3
.	
Because	some	procedures	require	sedation,	you	must	not	eat	or
drink	for	several	hours	before	the	procedure,	because	when	you	are
sedated	you	are	more	likely	to	inhale	food	and	stomach	acid	into
the	lungs,	which	can	result	in	severe	pneumonia.

--- PAGE 23 ---

CHAPTER	4
ANATOMY:	AN	EXPLANATION
OF	THE	PARTS	OF	YOU
THAT	YOU	CAN’T	SEE
IN	THE	MIRROR
Y
ou	may	be	tempted	to	skip	this	chapter	because	you	think	that	it	is
going	to	be	very	complex	or	way	too	much	like	high	school	biology.	We
have	tried	to	make	this	easy	to	understand.	People	tend	to	know	more
about	their	cars	than	they	do	about	their	own	bodies,	but	the	patient	in
pain	needs	to	understand	why	his	or	her	body	is	hurting	to	understand
how	to	get	better.	This	section	will	help	you	to	understand	some	of	the
procedures	that	are	discussed	in	later	sections.	If	you	decide	to	skip	this
chapter	(and	even	if	you	don’t),	we	urge	you	to	refer	back	to	these	pages
to	better	understand	the	anatomy	of	the	region	we	are	discussing.	If	it
seems	boring,	read	only	the	parts	that	apply	to	your	problem.	You	can
always	come	back	and	read	the	other	sections	when	you	can’t	sleep	at
night.
The	Central	Nervous	System
The	spine	and	
central	nervous	system
	are	the	key	to	understanding
pain.	These	complex	structures	are	literally	the	“backbone”	of	most	pain
treatments.	As	
degeneration
	and	damage	occurs	to	structures	of	the
spine,	various	parts	of	the	nervous	system	are	affected,	including	the
spinal	cord	and	nerve	roots	as	they	travel	down	from	the	brain	and	then
exit	the	
spinal	canal
.	The	spinal	canal	is	the	cylindrical	tube	that	runs

--- PAGE 24 ---

from	the	base	of	the	brain	to	the	tailbone.	This	is	where	the	spinal	cord
is	located	and	where	the	nerve	roots	exit	to	travel	to	all	the	other	parts
of	the	body	(
figure	4.1
).
Pain	is	processed	through	nerve	endings	called	receptors	and	then
transmitted	through	nerves	into	the	spinal	cord;	messages	
are	sent	from
the	spinal	cord	to	the	brain,	which	you	then	perceive	as	the	sensation	of
pain.	Different	structures	and	types	of	injuries	produce	different	qualities
or	sensations	of	pain.	For	example,	burning	pain	typically	accompanies
damage	to	nerves	and	aching	pain	is	commonly	associated	with
muscular	and/or	skeletal	injuries.	Processing	these	inputs	into	the
central	nervous	system	(brain	and	spinal	cord)	leads	to	the	conscious
perception	of	pain.	Manipulation	of	this	same	process	also	allows	us	to
treat	pain	and/or	change	the	patient’s	perception	of	pain.
Interventional	pain	treatments	are	typically	directed	at	areas	where
nerves	are	being	irritated,	compressed,	or	damaged.	Irritation	can	come
from	direct	compression	from	a	protruding	disc	(
figure	4.2
)	and/or	from
a	bone	or	ligament	overgrowth	(
figures	4.3	a
,	
b
,	and	
c
).	It	can	also	be
caused	by	chemical	irritation	from	a	
leaking	disc
.	The	bony	structures
of	the	spine	guide	the	placement	of	the	interventional	pain	physician’s
needles.	Using	fluoroscopic	or	x-ray	guidance,	the	physician	injects
structures	or	areas	within	the	spine	that	are	the	cause	of	pain.
Occasionally,	physicians	will	use	a	
CAT	scan
	(now	more	commonly
called	a	
CT	scan)
	or	
ultrasound
	for	guidance.	Each	of	these	methods
has	advantages	and	disadvantages.	Most	physicians	will	use	a	rotating	x-
ray	machine	called	a	
C-arm;
	because	of	its	curved	shape,	it	moves	in
multiple	different	directions	allowing	the	doctor	to	get	real-time	images
without	moving	the	patient.	With	this	machine,	the	physician	can	view
the	bony	structures	from	many	different	angles	and	determine	their
relationship	to	the	needle,	which	allows	precision-guided	placement	of
the	injection.
Several	structures	within	the	spine	are	typical	injection	sites.	For
instance,	the	
epidural	space
	is	the	space	between	the	spinal	cord	and
the	bony	spinal	canal	(
figure	4.4
).	The	spinal	nerves	pass	through	this
space	to	leave	the	spinal	canal,	and	medication	in	the	epidural	space
placed	near	a	nerve	that	is	being	compressed	or	irritated	can	relieve
pain.	These	injections	are	typically	referred	to	as	epidural	steroid
injections,	which	can	actually	describe	a	variety	of	different	injection

--- PAGE 25 ---

techniques	(see	
chapter	10
).
By	convention,	physicians	separate	the	spine	into	four	specific	areas
(see	
figure	4.1
):	cervical	(neck),	thoracic	(mid-back),	lumbar	(low	back),
and	sacral	(buttock).	There	are	seven	
cervical	vertebra	bones
,	labeled
C1	to	C7.	There	are	also	12	thoracic	vertebral	bones,	labeled	T1	to	T12,
and	five	
lumbar	vertebral	bones
,	labeled	L1	to	L5.	The	sacrum	is
composed	of	five	fused	vertebrae	(although	some	patients	have	more	or
less	vertebrae,	which	are	known	as	
transitional	segments
).	The	
coccyx
,
or	tailbone,	is	usually	a	fused	collection	of	three	smaller	bones.	Each
spinal	level,	or	vertebral	body,	is	separated	from	the	next	by	a	disc	in	the
front	of	the	spine	and	a	set	of	paired	joints	in	the	back	of	the	spine	called
facets	(
figure	4.5
).
There	are	two	specially	named	vertebral	bodies:	the	
atlas
	(C1),	on
which	the	skull	rests;	and	the	
axis
	(C2),	which	is	shaped	sort	of	like	a
post	on	which	the	atlas	sits	and	rotates.	The	joints	located	between	C1
and	C2	are	called	the	
atlanto-axial	(AA)	joints
.	The	
atlanto-occipital
(AO)	joints
	are	located	between	the	occiput	and	C1.	These	paired	joints
basically	run	from	the	skull	to	the	base	of	the	spine	and	are	oriented	in
different	directions,	or	planes,	in	different	areas	of	the	spine	(for
example,	the	neck	or	the	back);	they	are	prone	to	specific	injuries
depending	on	the	direction	and	type	of	force	applied.	Each	joint	has
multiple	nerves	that	go	to	it,	one	set	at	that	level	and	one	set	from	the
level	above	(
figure	4.6
).
Any	one	of	these	paired	joints	on	either	or	both	sides	can	cause	pain.
Arthritic	degeneration	or	traumatic	injury	such	as	a	whiplash
phenomenon	or	twisting	injury	can	cause	pain	in	
facet	joints
	within	the
spine	and/or	
sacroiliac	joints
	in	the	pelvis.	Like	the	facet	joints,	the
sacroiliac	joints	are	paired	structures	on	each	side	of	the	body	(
figure
4.7
).	Sacroiliac	joint	injuries	can	lead	to	instability	of	the	joint	in
addition	to	pain.	Slips	and	falls	or	a	traumatic	event	such	as	a	car
accident	can	make	these	joints	unstable	and	cause	them	to	slip	in	and
out	of	position	(
figure	4.8
).
Nerves	can	be	compressed	by	a	
disc	herniation
,	collapse	of	the	disc,
or	bone	overgrowth	and	degeneration.	The	disc	is	the	soft	tissue—the
shock	absorber—between	each	bone	of	the	spine;	these	
discs
	can
protrude	or	bulge	backward	into	the	spinal	canal,	pushing	on	a	nerve
(
figure	4.2
)	and	causing	pain.	Nerves	can	also	be	compressed	or	pinched

--- PAGE 26 ---

by	bony	overgrowths	caused	by	arthritic	changes	and	by	too	much
motion	of	the	spine,	referred	to	as	instability.	As	the	spine	ages,	the
joints	compensate	for	the	ongoing	stressors	of	life	by	growing	larger	to
better	support	the	spine.	Some	of	the	
ligaments
	or	other	supporting
structures	of	the	spine	can	also	thicken	
(hypertrophy)
.	The	combination
of	these	factors	can	lead	to	narrowing	of	the	central	spinal	canal	where
the	nerves	travel,	called	
spinal	stenosis
.	Stenosis	can	occur	centrally	or
in	the	holes	where	the	nerves	exit	(the	
neural	foramen)
	(
figures	4.3	a
,
b
,	and	
c
).	This	can	cause	compression	of	the	nerves,	which	causes
secondary	inflammation	of	the	nerve	and	causes	pain.	Steroid	injections
can	reverse	or	treat	this	inflammatory	process	and	decrease	pain,	but
injections	won’t	change	the	underlying	anatomy.	While	surgery	can
certainly	change	the	underlying	anatomy,	and	sometimes	this	really
helps,	surgery	can	sometimes	also	lead	to	its	own	set	of	problems.
After	the	nerves	exit	the	spinal	canal,	they	gather	into	major	nerve
trunks	going	to	both	the	arms	
(brachial	plexus)
	and	legs	(the	
sciatic
nerve)
.	In	the	chest	and	abdomen	as	well	as	in	the	arms	and	legs,	these
trunks	then	break	into	
peripheral	nerves
	(those	outside	the	spinal
column).	Nerves	can	be	damaged	anywhere	along	their	course	by
traumatic	injuries,	radiation,	or	surgery.	Injuries	to	the	nerves	anywhere
along	their	course	can	cause	the	development	of	a	particularly	severe
type	of	pain	syndrome,	typically	referred	to	as	a	
complex	regional	pain
syndrome	(CRPS)
,	which	is	discussed	further	in	
chapter	18
.
Transitional	Segments:	How	Many	Bones	In	Your	Lumbar	Spine?
Approximately	7%	of	the	American	population	and	approximately	15%
of	patients	with	chronic	lower	back	pain	have	what	is	called	a
transitional	segment	of	the	spine	(
figure	4.9
).	In	this	congenital
abnormality	(that	is,	a	condition	present	at	birth),	the	bones	in	the
lumbar	spine	and	pelvis	are	altered,	either	by	being	born	with	one	too
many	or	one	too	few	bones	in	the	lumbar	spine	and	therefore	fewer	or
more	discs.	Although	there	may	be	no	pain	involved	with	these	“design
flaws”	(one	of	the	authors	of	this	book	has	a	transitional	vertebra
without	any	pain),	it	appears	that	patients	with	this	abnormality	are
more	prone	to	the	development	of	chronic	lower	back	pain;	twice	the
percentage	of	people	with	chronic	back	pain	have	this	finding	compared
to	the	regular	population.	It	is	important	that	doctors	recognize	this

--- PAGE 27 ---

abnormality	as	it	can	have	a	significant	bearing	on	treatment	outcomes.
Also,	because	nerves	exit	and	work	on	very	specific	areas,	knowing
which	nerve	is	most	likely	to	be	affected	is	important	for	proper
treatment.

--- PAGE 28 ---

CHAPTER	5
DIAGNOSTIC	TESTING:
RADIOLOGY	AND
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC
MEDICINE
Y
ou	have	probably	already	had	your	share	of	radiologic	tests	and	are
wondering	if	you	are	going	to	start	glowing	in	the	dark.	It’s	very
common	to	be	concerned	about	the	level	of	radiation	you	are	being
exposed	to,	but	keep	in	mind	that	not	every	test	done	by	a	radiologist
involves	exposure	to	radiation	(for	instance	MRIs	use	magnets,	not
radiation,	to	develop	an	image	of	the	body’s	internal	structures).	Patients
who	should	be	most	concerned	about	radiation	exposure	are	women
who	are,	or	may	be,	pregnant.	If	you	think	it	is	possible	that	you	are
pregnant,	please	make	sure	you	tell	the	doctor	ordering	your	test	and	the
doctor	performing	the	test	before	it	is	done.
Each	test	plays	an	important	and	specific	role	in	determining	what
part	of	the	body	or	anatomical	structure	may	be	contributing	to	your
pain	and	will	help	your	doctor	to	diagnose	and	figure	out	how	to	treat
your	problem.	The	part	of	the	body	and	makeup	of	the	structure
(whether	it’s	bone	or	soft	tissue)	will	help	form	your	doctor’s	decisions
about	which	tests	to	perform	for	the	best	assessment	of	the	area	in
question.	Think	of	these	tests	like	different	types	of	eye	glasses;	you
choose	different	glasses	to	see	different	things	in	specific	conditions.	If
it’s	sunny	out,	you	wear	sunglasses.	You	might	wear	reading	glasses	to
read	a	book.	If	you	need	to	see	something	really	far	away,	you	might	use
binoculars,	and	if	you’re	looking	even	farther	away,	you	might	use	a

--- PAGE 29 ---

telescope.	When	your	doctor	selects	a	test,	he	or	she	is	considering	what
needs	to	be	seen	and	the	best	way	to	see	it.
Radiology:	A	Look	Inside	the	Body
When	patients	begin	treatment,	they	often	have	simple	x-rays	of	the
traumatized	area.	For	example,	if	you	had	a	slip	or	fall	that	landed	you
in	the	emergency	room,	it	is	very	likely	that	an	x-ray	would	have	been
taken	to	make	sure	no	bones	were	broken.	Simple	x-rays	are	very	good
for	looking	at	bones	and	can	also	help	diagnose	some	conditions,	such	as
arthritis	(
figure	5.1
).	Different	angles	and	views	may	be	obtained	to
better	see	the	part	of	the	body	in	question.	Occasionally,	x-rays	are	taken
in	various	positions	(for	instance,	leaning	forward	and	then	bending
backwards)	to	see	if	the	bones	are	moving	in	relation	to	each	other	and
to	assess	the	degree	of	instability.	Sometimes	fractures	are	so	subtle	that
it	becomes	difficult	to	see	them	on	x-ray	and	more	specialized	testing	is
required.
The	next	most	common	test	that	people	with	spine-related	problems
will	have	is	magnetic	resonance	imaging	(MRI).	MRI	(
figures	5.2	a
	and
b
)	does	not	involve	the	use	of	radiation;	it	uses	strong	magnetic	fields	to
look	at	soft-tissue	structures	within	the	body.	Some	soft	tissue	structures
may	appear	on	x-rays	and	
CT	scans
,	but	MRI	provides	the	best	look	at
this	type	of	structure.	MRI	scans	are	often	the	main	diagnostic	test
ordered	when	there	is	a	concern	about	a	
disc	herniation
	because	
discs
are	made	of	soft	tissue,	not	bone.	MRI	can	look	at	bones	as	well.	In	fact,
MRI	can	be	a	very	helpful	tool	when	looking	at	bones	because	it	shows
the	inflammation	or	
edema
	from	a	recent	fracture	or	from	chronic
instability/excessive	motion.	MRI	scans	provide	multiple	views	of	an
area	that	can	help	provide	clearer	pictures	of	certain	structures.
Sometimes	contrast	is	given	during	an	MRI	scan.	The	contrast	is	given
by	vein	so	that	it	will	flow	with	your	blood	to	different	parts	of	the	body.
Pictures	are	taken	before	and	after	the	contrast	is	injected.	If	a	patient
has	had	surgery,	the	scar	tissue	will	“light	up”	on	the	MR	images.	This
helps	the	radiologist	and	your	doctor	differentiate	between	what	is	scar
tissue	and	what	may	be	a	recurrent	disc	herniation.	MRI	can	also	be	very
helpful	to	identify	tears	or	cracks	in	the	outer	wall	of	the	disc,	a	defect
that	is	commonly	associated	with	back	pain.

--- PAGE 30 ---

Sometimes,	your	doctor	will	send	you	for	a	CT	scan	(
figure	5.3
).	This
is	also	called	a	
CAT	scan
,	which	stands	for	computed	axial	tomography.
CT	scans	are	typically	used	for	bony	structures.	CT	scans	are	also
combined	with	other	radiology	tests	such	as	
discograms
	and
myelograms
	to	better	see	the	dye	that	has	been	injected	into	the	spine.
During	discography	(see	
chapter	16
),	dye	is	injected	into	
the	disc;	a	CT
scan,	which	typically	follows	the	discogram,	can	then	help	doctors
visualize	the	exact	location	where	the	disc	is	leaking.	CT	scans	are	also
done	after	myelograms	(injections	of	dye	into	the	spinal	fluid)	to	better
tell	which	nerve	roots	are	compressed.	By	looking	for	areas	where	the
dye	doesn’t	flow,	doctors	can	find	areas	where	there	is	nerve
compression.
Nuclear	medicine	scans	involve	labeling	normal	cells	within	the	body
using	various	radioactive	isotopes,	and	then	following	those	cells	to	see
if	they	lead	us	to	the	problem	(this	is	very	safe,	even	though	it	sounds
like	something	scary	out	of	a	sci-fi	movie).	This	can	be	used	to	find
hidden	fractures	or	infections	in	a	bone	or	other	deep	cavity	of	the	body.
Stress	tests	for	the	heart	commonly	include	a	nuclear	medicine	scan.
One	of	the	more	common	types	of	nuclear	medicine	study	is	a	
bone
scan
,	which	is	used	to	follow	metabolic	changes	in	the	bone	as	a	sign	of
hidden	fractures,	infection,	or	tumor.	Often	these	findings	are	not
associated	with	major	radiologic	changes	(
figure	5.4
).	Bone	scans	can
also	check	for	fusion	healing	(after	surgery)	and	bone	inflammation,
such	as	occurs	with	arthritis.	Bone	scans	will	show	increased	uptake	or
changes	in	areas	of	acute	inflammation	and	increased	bone	activity.
Bone	scans	are	also	sometimes	used	for	evaluation	of	
complex	regional
pain	syndrome
	(CRPS,	see	
chapter	18
)	and	will	show	different	findings
during	the	various	stages	of	the	disease.	Many	patients	(about	a	third)
will	not	show	bone	changes	despite	having	the	diagnosis	of	CRPS.
Therefore,	this	particular	test	does	not	necessarily	rule	out	a	diagnosis	of
CRPS	but	can	help	to	confirm	it.
Other	more	specific	tests,	such	as	positron	emission	tomography	(PET)
scans,	are	commonly	used	in	the	evaluation	of	cancer.	This	particular
test	looks	for	increased	metabolic	activity.	Cancer	is	associated	with	an
overgrowth	of	abnormal	cells	in	the	body,	which	is	seen	as	increased
metabolic	activity	due	to	the	rapid	growth	that	occurs	in	the	area	of	a
tumor.	When	areas	of	higher	metabolic	activity	are	seen	on	a	PET	scan,

--- PAGE 31 ---

it	may	tell	your	doctor	where	the	disease	may	have	spread.	PET	scans
are	also	used	to	see	if	the	cancer	is	responding	to	treatment.
If	you	have	back	or	neck	pain,	it	is	likely	that	your	doctor	will	either
review	tests	that	you	have	already	had	or	send	you	for	more	tests	during
the	workup	and	treatment	of	your	condition.	These	tests	are	extremely
important	in	helping	your	doctor	determine	the	exact	cause	of	your	pain
and	also	in	helping	him	or	her	treat	your	
symptoms.	Make	sure	you
know	where	all	of	your	test	results	are,	and	bring	them	with	you	to	your
first	appointment,	if	possible.	If	you	have	already	had	an	MRI,	your
physician	may	not	need	to	order	another	MRI.	If	you	have	had	an	MRI	in
the	past	and	your	physician	orders	a	new	one,	it	is	often	helpful	to
compare	the	two	scans	to	see	what	has	changed.
Once	your	doctor	has	seen	the	complete	picture	from	all	of	these	tests,
it	will	be	easier	to	make	the	right	diagnosis	and	get	you	feeling	better.
Also,	remember	that	your	doctor	may	not	have	the	results	of	your	testing
right	away.	Some	tests	give	immediate	results	but	other	tests	may	take
more	time	to	get	the	results.	For	example,	MRI	images	and	CT	scans	are
made	up	of	hundreds	of	individual	pictures	that	a	radiologist	has	to
interpret.	The	radiologist	will	prepare	a	report	based	on	what	he	or	she
sees	in	the	pictures	and	will	then	send	a	copy	to	the	doctor	who	referred
you	for	the	test.	Your	doctor	will	usually	want	to	see	your	actual	films,
so	check	with	your	doctor’s	office	to	see	if	you	should	bring	copies	of	the
study	to	your	next	appointment.
Questions	to	Ask	Your	Doctor:
1
.	
Ask	your	doctor	if	he	would	like	you	to	bring	copies	of	any	tests	to
your	next	appointment.	In	addition	to	getting	a	report	from	the
radiologist,	some	doctors	like	to	review	the	pictures	from	MRI,	CT
scans,	and	x-rays	themselves.	These	pictures	are	made	on	large
pieces	of	plastic	that	are	viewed	on	light	boxes	or	on	CDs	that	are
viewed	on	computers.
2
.	
Ask	your	doctor	when	he	would	like	you	to	come	back	to	the	office
to	discuss	the	results.	Depending	on	the	type	of	test	and	what	will
be	done	with	the	information,	your	doctor	may	want	to	send	you	for
additional	testing	or	see	you	in	the	office	first	to	discuss	the	next
step	in	your	treatment	plan.

--- PAGE 32 ---

3
.	
Ask	your	doctor	if	your	insurance	carrier	requires	precertification
for	the	tests	you	are	about	to	undergo.	If	you	need	precertification,
find	out	who	will	be	contacting	you	to	schedule	the	test.	If	you
schedule	your	own	test	and	it	needs	to	be	authorized	first,	you	may
be	stuck	with	a	rather	large	bill.	Once	your	test	is	scheduled,	if	you
change	the	date	of	your	test	or	the	facility	where	you	are	having	it
done,	let	your	doctor’s	office	know	ahead	of	time.	Many	insurance
carriers	require	that	your	doctor’s	office	tell	them	ahead	of	time
where	you	are	having	your	scan.	If	you	go	
somewhere	else,	the
approval	may	no	longer	be	valid	and	then	you	will	possibly	be
responsible	again	for	the	cost	of	the	test.
Before	the	Procedure:
1
.	
MRI	machines	use	high-powered	magnets.	If	you	have	any	metal	in
your	body,	tell	your	doctor	and	the	radiologist	
before
	you	undergo
the	test.	Metal	in	your	body	may	include	screws,	rods,	and	artificial
joints.	It	also	includes	implants	for	chronic	pain	management	(see
chapter	20
).	If	you	have	ever	worked	with	metal	(welders,	etc.),	you
may	need	to	undergo	an	x-ray	before	the	MRI	to	make	sure	you
don’t	have	any	slivers	of	metal	lodged	under	your	skin	or	in	your
eyes.
2
.	
If	there	is	any	chance	that	you	are	pregnant	or	may	become
pregnant,	discuss	this	with	your	doctor	before	undergoing	any
testing.	The	decision	to	do	the	test	may	require	a	conversation
between	your	pain	doctor	and	your	obstetrician.	Sometimes	you	will
need	to	have	a	radiology	test	even	if	you	are	pregnant.	Some	tests
are	relatively	safe	for	your	unborn	baby.
3
.	
Make	sure	your	doctor	is	aware	of	any	surgery	you	may	have	had	in
the	past.	For	instance,	if	you	have	had	prior	back	surgery,	you	will
need	to	have	contrast	or	dye	with	your	MRI.
4
.	
Tell	your	physician	if	you	have	any	issues	with	claustrophobia.
Claustrophobia	is	the	fear	of	being	in	an	enclosed	space.	MRI
machines	are	essentially	large	tubes	that	your	body	is	placed	in,	and
if	you	are	claustrophobic,	you	may	need	to	take	some	medication
ahead	of	time	to	make	sure	this	experience	is	as	comfortable	as
possible.

--- PAGE 33 ---

Electrodiagnostic	Medicine:	More	Tests	to	Complete	the	Picture
When	you	first	see	an	interventional	pain	physician,	you	will	undergo	a
history,	physical	examination,	and	appropriate	testing.	In	many	cases,
you	might	have	an	MRI	or	a	CT	scan	as	part	of	your	workup.	However,
sometimes	additional	specialized	testing	might	be	warranted.	Physicians
refer	to	this	kind	of	testing	as	electrodiagnosis.	This	information	gives
the	doctor	a	better	idea	of	how	certain	nerves	and	muscles	in	the	body
may	be	affected	by	your	condition.	The	information	obtained	from
electrodiagnostic	testing
	will	help	determine	a	more	precise	diagnosis.
For	example,	if	you	have	pain	in	your	lower	back	and	one	or	both	of
your	legs,	a	properly	conducted	history,	physical	examination,	and	MRI
result	might	all	point	to	some	degenerated	discs	in	your	lumbar	spine.
Electrodiagnostic	testing	can	help	determine	which	particular	disc
level(s)	need	treatment.	In	that	case,	your	pain	physician	can	more
precisely	focus	the	treatment	at	the	affected	disc	level(s).	If	you
experience	pain	and	numbness	in	your	arm	and	hand,	there	are	at	least
two	locations	where	this	problem	could	be	coming	from:	your	neck	or
your	wrist.	Electrodiagnostics	can	help	focus	the	diagnosis,	and	thereby
direct	the	physician	to	the	more	appropriate	treatment.
Electrodiagnostic	testing	is	usually	done	by	a	physician	with	a
background	in	neurology	or	physical	medicine	and	rehabilitation.	In
some	cases,	your	interventional	pain	physician	may	perform	the	test	if
he	or	she	has	that	specialty	background.	Some	physicians	are	certified	by
the	American	Board	of	Electrodiagnostic	Medicine	(ABEM),	but	this	is
rarely	mandated.
Nerve	Conduction	Study	and	Electromyography
One	of	the	more	frequently	performed	sets	of	tests	is	a	
nerve
conduction	study	(NCS)
	and	
electromyography	(EMG)
.	Having	an
EMG	or	a	nerve	conduction	study	for	your	nerves	and	muscles	is	like
having	an	electrocardiogram	(ECG)	for	your	heart.
A	nerve	conduction	study	evaluates	the	speed	and	number	of	nerve
fibers	that	are	working.	The	test	allows	your	doctor	to	determine	how
the	nerves	are	functioning.	By	measuring	the	speed	at	which	an	impulse
travels	and	the	appearance	of	wave	forms,	they	can	determine	the	type

--- PAGE 34 ---

and	extent	of	nerve	injury.	Just	like	with	an	ECG,	there	are	normal
waveforms	and	abnormal	waveforms.	Abnormal	waveforms	suggest	the
source	of	the	problem.	These	measurements	are	compared	from	one	side
of	the	body	to	the	other,	and	also	against	published	and	standardized
data	obtained	from	thousands	of	patients.	The	activation	of	the
stimulator	used	during	the	test	feels	like	static	electricity,	such	as	when
you	rub	your	feet	on	a	carpet	and	then	touch	another	person.	One
portion	of	this	test	is	done	by	inserting	a	needle	into	the	muscles,	which
can	be	uncomfortable	but	is	not	usually	painful.

--- PAGE 35 ---

CHAPTER	6
COMPREHENSIVE	PAIN
THERAPY:	OTHER	PIECES
OF	THE	PUZZLE
I
nterventional	pain	management
	treatments	are	rarely	performed	in
isolation	and	are	usually	combined	with	physical	therapy	and	other
therapeutic	treatment	modalities.	As	a	general	principle,	it	is	wise	to
start	with	conservative	treatment	and	only	progress	to	more-invasive
options	when	less-invasive	approaches	have	failed.	Pain	management
often	requires	a	multidisciplinary	approach	to	address	other	problems
that	accompany	the	primary	underlying	condition	and	achieve	an
optimal	result.	Your	pain	management	physician	may	ask	you	to
participate	in	other	treatments	as	directed	by	physicians	in	other
specialties	to	complement	the	pain	management	treatments	you	are
undergoing.	Some	practices	will	have	all	this	care	under	one	roof,	and
others	work	collaboratively	with	other	physicians	or	practices	in	the	area
to	accomplish	the	goal	of	comprehensive	treatment.	This	may	include
elements	such	as	medication	management,	physical	therapy,	massage,
acupuncture
,	chiropractic	or	osteopathic	manipulation,	and	
behavioral
counseling
.	These	treatments	are	meant	to	help	treat	your	pain	and	to
get	you	back	to	living	as	normal	a	life	as	possible.	Remember	that	every
little	bit	can	help.
Physical	Therapy
By	the	time	you	read	this	book,	you	may	have	already	tried	physical
therapy	(PT)	for	many	weeks,	perhaps	months,	and	maybe	even	years.

--- PAGE 36 ---

Physical	therapy	is	an	important	adjunct	to	many	of	the	treatments	that
interventional	pain	physicians	perform.	Patients	are	often	referred	for
pain	management	evaluations	when	the	benefits	
from	physical	therapy
or	chiropractic	care	have	plateaued.	Further	physical	therapy	may	be
appropriate	after	the	pain	physician	has	alleviated	some	of	your	painful
symptoms	and	improved	your	function	to	the	point	where	you	can	again
make	progress	with	PT.	Sometimes	physical	therapy	is	instituted	too
early:	the	first	time	you	tried	PT,	you	may	have	been	in	so	much	pain
that	you	weren’t	able	to	do	the	exercises	properly	or	consistently	enough
to	benefit.	More	functional	gains	can	be	made	when	your	pain	is	better
managed.
Many	excellent	books	are	solely	dedicated	to	physical	therapy.	For	the
purposes	of	this	book,	it’s	important	for	you	to	understand	that	your
physician	will	likely	have	you	involved	with	physical	therapy	and
exercise	before,	during,	and/or	after	your	therapeutic	interventions.	The
goals	of	the	physical	therapy	program	designed	for	you	will	vary	from
person	to	person.	For	most	people,	improving	muscular	strength	is
important	to	improve	the	long-term	stability	of	the	affected	area.	Other
goals	may	include	increased	flexibility	or	developing	proper	lifting
techniques	and	other	life	skills	to	prevent	re-injury.	Therapy	programs
are	often	prescribed	for	a	specific	amount	of	time	(i.e.,	twice	a	week	for
six	weeks),	and	when	the	program	ends,	patients	are	usually	expected	to
continue	doing	the	exercises	on	their	own.
When	you’re	injured	or	when	a	
chronic	pain
	condition	progresses,
you	will	often	baby	the	area.	Consider	what	happens	when	you	cut	your
hand	while	cooking.	For	a	while,	you	will	try	to	avoid	doing	things	with
that	hand.	Once	the	cut	heals,	you	return	to	using	your	hand	as	you	did
before	it	was	injured.	Now	imagine	that	you	couldn’t	use	that	hand	for
months	or	even	years.	Eventually	you	would	lose	strength	in	your	hand
and	arm	because	you	haven’t	been	lifting,	turning,	or	moving	anything
with	that	hand.	Physical	therapy	will	help	you	regain	strength	in	the
injured	area,	improve	stability,	and	ensure	proper	alignment	so	you	can
return	to	normal	activities	of	daily	living.	Treatments	in	which	the	disc
is	repaired	(see	
chapter	17
	on	minimally	invasive	disc	surgery)	often
require	extensive	postoperative	physical	therapy	to	stabilize	and	improve
the	function	of	the	operative	region.	Physical	therapy	is	also	usually
prescribed	to	help	you	regain	strength	and	increase	your	ability	to

--- PAGE 37 ---

function	following	open	lumbar	surgeries	such	as	microdiscectomies,
fusions,	or	disc	replacements.	Physical	therapy	is	typically	used
throughout	the	treatment	of	CRPS,	but	those	who	have	severe
dysfunction	may	require	very	lengthy	courses	of	physical	therapy	to
regain	maximal	function.	These	are	just	a	few	examples	of	how	physical
therapy	is	used	to	help	chronic	pain	patients.
Behavioral	Counseling
Don’t	be	alarmed	or	concerned	if	your	physician	recommends
psychological	evaluation,	testing,	or	counseling;	this	is	part	of	the	global
approach	to	improve	your	symptoms.	It	doesn’t	mean	your	doctor	thinks
you’re	crazy.	Unfortunately,	patients	with	chronic	pain	often	develop
secondary	psychological	dysfunction	including	depression,	anxiety,	and
other	problems.	Much	like	physical	therapy,	behavioral	modification	and
psychiatric	care	exist	to	help	you	deal	with	your	chronic	pain.	It	is	also
not	uncommon	for	patients	with	personality	disorders,	pre-existing
anxiety,	or	pre-existing	depression	to	develop	chronic	pain.	To
effectively	treat	chronic	pain,	it	is	often	necessary	to	also	address
underlying,	and	sometimes	pre-existing,	psychological	issues	that	are
going	on	simultaneously.	Uncontrolled	depression	and	anxiety	can
reduce	the	beneficial	effects	of	other	therapeutic	interventions,	and	some
insurance	carriers	won’t	cover	some	therapies	(such	as	implantable
techniques)	if	the	patient	has	psychological	issues	that	aren’t	well
controlled.	Mental	health	concerns	must	be	addressed	to	optimize	your
long-term	outcome.	Again,	this	book	is	not	meant	to	be	a	primer	on
psychological	conditions	or	even	the	psychological	aspects	of	pain,	but
we	merely	want	to	point	out	that	it’s	often	an	important	component	of
treatment	in	the	chronic	pain	patient.
Other	Therapies
Other	adjuvant	therapies	can	include	
TENS	units
,	acupuncture,
chiropractic	treatment,	
orthotics
	(shoe	inserts),	weight	loss	programs,
smoking	cessation,	
spinal	decompression	therapy
,	and	many	other
treatment	modalities	that	your	interventional	pain	management

--- PAGE 38 ---

physician	may	deem	appropriate	for	your	specific	condition.

--- PAGE 39 ---

CHAPTER	7
MEDICATIONS:
SO	MUCH	MORE	THAN
JUST	PAIN	PILLS
A
	variety	of	medications	can	be	useful	in	pain	treatment.	This	chapter
will	provide	a	brief	overview	of	the	various	types	of	medications	that	are
used	in	the	treatment	of	
chronic	pain
.	As	you	will	see,	there	is	more	to
taking	pain	medication	than	popping	a	pill	to	feel	better.	It	is	extremely
important	to	take	your	medications	as	prescribed.	If	your	doctor	sends
you	for	blood	work,	remember	that	it’s	important,	so	don’t	put	it	off.
You	must	also	inform	your	doctor	of	all	side	effects	you	experience.
What	may	seem	embarrassing	and	unrelated	(like	constipation	or	sexual
dysfunction)	can	have	severe	consequences.	Maintain	an	open	dialogue
with	your	doctor	about	how	your	medications	are	working.	The	earlier
side	effects	are	reported,	the	better	your	chance	of	decreasing	their
negative	effects.
Opioids	(Narcotics)
When	people	think	of	pain	medications,	they	usually	think	of	opioids	or
narcotics.	Although	the	terms	are	relatively	interchangeable,	an	opioid	is
a	medical	term	used	to	describe	medicines	that	work	at	the	receptors	in
the	brain	where	opium	and	morphine	work,	whereas	narcotic	is	a	legal
term	that	describes	substances	with	the	potential	for	illegal	use.
Opioids	can	be	classified	by	their	length	of	action.	
Short-acting
opioids
	usually	last	for	two	to	four	hours	and	are	best	used	for	acute
pain,	such	as	the	pain	immediately	following	a	broken	bone	or	extracted

--- PAGE 40 ---

tooth.	Unfortunately,	most	pain	patients	have	pain	that	lasts	for	hours,
days,	weeks,	or	even	years,	and	the	short-acting	medicines	may	not	be
the	best	choice	for	these	patients.	Imagine	that	
you	were	in	a	room	with
a	strong	smell.	After	a	while,	you	would	get	used	to	the	smell	and	you
wouldn’t	notice	it	as	much.	But	if	you	were	to	walk	out	of	the	room	and
then	come	back	a	few	minutes	later,	the	smell	would	seem	much
stronger	than	it	had	originally.	We	think	the	same	is	true	with	pain:	if
you	take	a	short-acting	pain	medicine	to	relieve	pain	and	then	the
medicine	wears	off,	the	pain	may	seem	to	return	stronger	than	it	was
before	you	took	the	pain	medication.	We	also	think	the	“pop	a	pill,	feel
better”	relief	of	short-acting	medicines	is	part	of	what	leads	to	addiction.
So	instead,	we	often	turn	to	
long-acting	opioids
	for	patients	who	suffer
chronic	pain.	These	forms	of	medication	provide	a	sustained,	steady
release	of	medication	for	eight	to	72	hours,	depending	on	the	delivery
system	used.	In	theory,	long-acting	opioids	are	supposed	to	be	less
addictive	because	they	don’t	reinforce	the	behavior	of	popping	pills.
While	there	may	be	some	validity	to	that	statement,	we	have	learned	the
hard	way	with	medicines	like	Oxycontin
®
	that	these	drugs	clearly	are
just	as	addictive	and	perhaps	more	so.
Another	method	of	classification	is	to	divide	opioids	into	classes	based
on	how	they	are	made.	Medications	that	are	directly	made	from	opium
are	naturally-occurring	opioids,	such	as	morphine	and	codeine.	Opioids
that	are	created	in	the	laboratory	from	those	naturally-occurring
compounds	are	called	semisynthetic	opioids,	such	as	oxycodone	and
hydrocodone.	
Synthetic	opioids
	are	compounds	that	originated	in	the
laboratory,	such	as	fentanyl	and	methadone.
A	third	method	of	classification	deals	with	how	the	opioids	function.
They	can	work	by	stimulating	a	receptor	in	the	brain	where	morphine
works;	these	pain	medicines	are	called	opioid	
agonists
	and	include
morphine	as	well	as	oxycodone,	hydrocodone,	fentanyl,	oxymorphone,
hydromorphone,	and	methadone.	Another	type	of	opioid	is	called	an
agonist/antagonist	opioid	because	it	antagonizes	(inhibits	or	blocks)	the
receptor	where	morphine	works	and	instead	stimulates	a	different	opioid
receptor.	Examples	of	agonist
/antagonist
	opioids	include	Stadol
®
	or
Nubain
®
.	These	medicines	should	not	be	used	with	standard	opioids
because	they	can	suddenly	make	those	pain	medicines	stop	working,
leading	to	withdrawal	symptoms.	Pure	opioid	antagonists	such	as

--- PAGE 41 ---

Narcan
®
	are	used	to	reverse	the	respiratory	depressant	effects	of	opioids.
All	opioid	medicines	work	by	dulling	the	brain.	They	don’t	make	the
pain	go	away;	it	is	like	stuffing	cotton	in	your	ears	so	you	don’t	hear	the
noise	as	much.	There	are	several	serious	concerns	
about	using	opioids	to
treat	chronic	pain.	Pain	is	often	a	protective	mechanism	that	warns	you
of	injury,	so	by	dulling	the	pain	response,	pain	medicines	can	potentially
set	up	the	possibility	for	further	injury.	For	many	chronic	pain	patients,
however,	pain	has	lost	its	protective	role.	Pain	medicines	also	tend	to	be
sedating,	so	patients	do	less	rather	than	more,	which	leads	to	increased
debilitation	and	deconditioning.	For	example,	if	you	used	to	be	able	to
run	marathons	and	you	fell	and	broke	your	leg,	you	wouldn’t	be	able	to
run	a	marathon	the	day	you	get	out	of	your	cast.	To	get	back	to	the	level
of	stamina	you	once	had,	you	will	need	to	recondition	your	body.	At
first,	you	may	need	medication	to	perform	simple	activities,	but	your	leg
will	eventually	return	to	the	condition	it	was	in	before	you	broke	it,	and
you’ll	be	able	to	stop	taking	the	medication	and	return	to	a	normal	life.
Pain	medicines	should	be	used	to	improve	function	and	allow
rehabilitation,	not	to	get	high.
Side	Effects	and	Complications
Because	pain	medicines	can	dull	the	brain,	they	may	make	you	less
responsive	to	everything	around	you,	which	may	potentially	make	it
dangerous	to	drive	a	car	or	operate	heavy	machinery.	This	is	true	of
many	medications	but	is	especially	true	of	opioids.	Every	individual	is
different;	some	patients	do	not	experience	these	cognitive	changes	and
can	lead	normal	lives,	including	operating	a	car	while	taking	pain
medications.	Some	cannot;	if	you	think	your	medications	are	affecting
your	ability	to	perform	normal	functions,	you	should	call	your	doctor	to
discuss	this	right	away.
People	breathe	less	deeply	and	more	slowly	when	they	are	taking
opioids;	when	this	is	to	a	degree	that	it	is	dangerous,	it	is	called
respiratory	depression
.	The	risk	of	this	can	be	increased	by	many
factors,	especially	if	pain	medicines	are	mixed	with	other	substances	that
cause	respiratory	depression	(such	as	alcohol	or	tranquilizers).	If	left
unrecognized,	this	can	lead	to	coma	and	death.	Pain	medicines	can	also
lead	to	poor	judgment	and	decreased	mental	acuity.	Patients	often

--- PAGE 42 ---

complain	that	pain	medications	make	them	feel	“stupid.”
Over	time,	pain	medicines	tend	to	become	less	effective,	so	you	will
require	larger	doses	to	get	the	same	effect.	This	is	called	developing	a
tolerance.	Tolerance	occurs	because	the	receptors	in	the	brain	become
less	sensitive	to	a	medicine	that	is	used	over	a	long	period	of	time.	This
is	similar	to	tasting	salty	food.	Initially,	the	food	tastes	salty,	but	you
become	accustomed	to	that	taste	over	time;	then	food	without	salt	tastes
bland	because	your	taste	buds	have	become	accustomed	
to	saltiness.
Some	patients	can	be	maintained	on	the	same	dosage	for	many	years
without	any	attenuation	of	effect,	others	have	bigger	problems	with
tolerance.	The	answer	is,	however,	not	to	just	keep	increasing	the
medication	and	chasing	the	pain;	this	approach	rarely	works.	Rotating
medications,	drug	holidays	(when	no	meds	are	taken	for	a	period	of
time),	and	treating	the	underlying	condition	are	all	viable	options.
Sometimes	just	treatment	of	an	exacerbation	with	an	injection	can	bring
the	pain	back	under	control	and	make	the	same	medications	effective
again.
Physical	dependence	is	another	concern.	Once	your	body	gets	used	to
pain	medicines,	you	can	experience	withdrawal	when	you	don’t	have	the
medicines.	The	more	pain	medicine	you	take,	the	more	likely	it	is	that
your	body	will	develop	dependence.	Physical	dependence,	however,	is
not	necessarily	the	same	as	addiction.	For	example,	if	you	are	diabetic
and	stopped	taking	your	
insulin
,	your	blood	sugars	would	go	out	of
control	and	you	would	get	very	sick.	That	doesn’t	mean	you’re	addicted
to	insulin;	it	means	that	you	have	developed	a	physical	need	for	the
medicine.	Addiction,	on	the	other	hand,	is	a	drug-seeking	behavior.	It’s	a
compulsive	need	to	take	the	medicine	despite	the	knowledge	of	its
potential	harm.	Some	people	are	more	at	risk	for	addiction	because	of	a
prior	addiction	to	other	substances	(such	as	alcohol	or	nicotine),	a	family
history	of	addiction,	a	history	of	psychological	or	sexual	abuse,	or	simply
being	young	and	inexperienced	with	taking	these	medicines.	Almost	10%
of	the	population	has	a	gene	that	predisposes	them	to	the	risk	of
addiction.	You	should	expect	your	prescribing	physician	to	monitor	you
closely	and	intervene	if	they	think	you	are	becoming	addicted	to	your
medications.
Because	there	are	also	opioid	receptors	in	the	gut,	taking	opioids	slows
down	the	movement	of	the	gut,	so	all	opioids	can	cause	constipation.

--- PAGE 43 ---

Usually	this	is	a	relatively	mild	problem	and	can	be	easily	managed	with
increased	fluids,	laxatives,	and	medicines	to	stimulate	gut	movement.
However,	if	untreated,	the	stool	can	harden	and	you	may	become
impacted	(unable	to	have	a	bowel	movement).	In	its	most	severe	form,
the	bowel	can	potentially	even	rupture,	causing	widespread	infection	in
the	belly	
(peritonitis)
	and	even	death.	As	embarrassing	as	it	may	be,	if
you	develop	constipation	from	your	medications,	it	is	important	that	you
report	this	to	your	doctors	before	a	minor	inconvenience	becomes	a
major	problem.
All	opioids	can	release	
histamine
,	a	compound	the	body	makes	that
causes	itching,	welts,	and	swelling.	Some	opioids	(such	as	
morphine)
tend	to	release	more	histamine	than	others;	this	does	not	represent	an
allergic	reaction	and	actually	usually	gets	better	over	time,	unlike
allergic	reactions,	which	would	be	expected	to	get	worse	with	each
dosage.	Opioids	can	cause	sweating,	which	is	usually	mild	but	may	be
severe	at	times.	Opioids	also	can	stimulate	areas	in	the	brain,	which
cause	nausea	and	vomiting.	Long-term	use	can	decrease	the	body’s
production	of	hormones	such	as	estrogen	and	testosterone,	necessitating
some	form	of	external	supplementation.	Hypogonadism	(low	hormonal
levels)	is	becoming	a	much	more	commonly	recognized	complication	of
chronic	opioids.	Symptoms	include	fatigue,	decreased	sexual	drive,	poor
pain	relief,	and	depression.
As	you	can	see,	opioids	are	useful	medicines	to	treat	pain,	but	they
also	have	significant	and	potentially	severe	side	effects	that	may	limit
their	long-term	use.	All	side	effects	should	be	reported	to	your	physician,
who	will	help	guide	you	to	properly	respond.
Medication/Narcotic/Opioid	Agreements	and	Drug	Testing
Many	of	the	medications	discussed	in	our	review	have	the	potential	for
misuse,	abuse,	and	diversion.	Pain	physicians	commonly	employ	some
form	of	patient	monitoring	to	ensure	that	patients	are	taking	their
medications	as	prescribed	and	are	not	taking	medications	unknown	to
the	doctor,	whether	legal	or	illegal.
It	is	important	that	your	physician	monitor	the	effects	of	any
medications	you	are	given.	In	the	same	way	that	some	medications	can
cause	liver	or	kidney	damage	and	must	be	monitored	closely	to	identify

--- PAGE 44 ---

problems	early,	before	the	changes	are	permanent	or	life	threatening,
opioids	must	be	monitored	closely	to	look	for	early	signs	of	addiction.
Addiction	can	strike	anyone,	regardless	of	socioeconomic	class	or
ethnicity,	so	everyone	must	be	monitored.	Because	these	medications
have	a	“street	value”	and	some	people	will	sell	or	trade	their	medicines,
your	doctor	will	likely	have	you	sign	a	treatment	agreement	with	a
series	of	rules	that	you	must	obey	in	order	to	continue	receiving	these
medications.	He	or	she	will	also	likely	periodically	monitor	your	use	of
the	medicines	through	at	least	one	of	the	following	methods:
1
.	
Urine	drug	testing	(UDT)
.	Like	monitoring	blood	sugars	for	a	patient
with	diabetes	on	insulin,	a	UDT	monitors	the	opioids	in	your	blood
stream	(and	therefore	in	the	urine).	Your	doctor	will	look	for	the
medication(s)	that	were	prescribed,	but	also	for	
medicine(s)	that
were	not	prescribed,	and	for	illegal	drugs	such	as	heroin	or	cocaine.
2
.	
Pill	counts
.	Your	doctor	might	ask	you	to	bring	in	your	pill	bottle	to
count	the	number	of	pills	left	to	ensure	you	aren’t	taking	more	than
was	prescribed.
3
.	
Prescription	drug	monitoring	programs	(PDMP)
.	Many	states	monitor
opioid	prescriptions	to	identify	patients	who	are	getting	pain	pills
from	multiple	doctors,	almost	always	a	sign	that	a	patient	is	in
trouble	with	their	medications.	At	the	time	of	this	writing,	43	states
have	laws	that	have	helped	to	establish,	or	that	will	establish,	such
monitoring	programs.	We	expect	that	all	50	states	will	have	such
programs	in	the	near	future	and	that	eventually	this	information
will	be	shared	between	the	various	states	to	allow	your	physician	to
monitor	medication	use	across	state	lines.
Anti-Inflammatories
Pain	is	caused	by	inflammation.	When	cell	membranes	are	damaged	(for
instance,	by	a	knife	blade	or	a	bruise),	they	release	chemicals	that	are
metabolized	into	compounds	called	prostaglandins.	Prostaglandins
trigger	a	pain	response	(causing	you	to	hold	that	part	of	your	body	still),
increased	blood	flow	(to	bring	in	repair	cells),	and	swelling.	Pain	from
tissue	trauma,	infections,	and	irritation	is	caused	by	inflammation.
Inflammation	is	the	body’s	natural	response	to	tissue	injury	and	is

--- PAGE 45 ---

helpful	as	a	warning	that	this	is	occurring.	However,	once	the	problem	is
known,	continuing	inflammation	becomes	counterproductive.	It	can	be
diminished	by	the	use	of	powerful	drugs	that	inhibit	the	response.	The
two	types	of	anti-inflammatory	medications	are	steroid	or	non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory	agents.
Steroids
Steroids	are	the	strongest	
anti-inflammatory	medicines
	available.
Steroids	are	classified	by	their	function.	
Glucocorticosteroids
	control
inflammation,	while	
mineralocorticoid	steroids
	control	the	volume	of
fluid	in	your	blood	vessels	and	therefore	blood	pressure,	and
androgenic	steroids
	are	used	to	bulk	up	muscles.	Your	body	makes
steroids	all	the	time.	Steroids	are	produced	in	the	body	by	the	adrenal
glands	that	sit	on	top	of	the	kidneys,	and	the	adrenal	glands	constantly
measure	the	amount	of	steroid	in	the	blood	to	decide	how	much	more	to
make.	Steroids	control	a	wide	variety	of	functions	in	
your	body,
including	the	amount	of	sugar	in	your	blood,	the	amount	of	calcium	in
your	bones,	the	texture	of	your	skin,	the	texture	of	your	hair,	the
distribution	of	fat,	the	distribution	of	muscle,	and	the	body’s	response	to
inflammation.	In	fact,	steroids	keep	you	from	turning	into	one	big	blister
every	day,	since	every	activity	you	do	can	create	inflammation.	Steroids
can	be	used	on	the	skin	(topically),	by	mouth,	by	vein,	by	injection	in
the	muscle,	or	in	a	time-release	formulation	injected	right	where	the
problem	is	located.	In	other	chapters,	you	will	learn	about	steroids
placed	on	nerves,	tendons,	joints,	and	in	the	spinal	column	for	the
treatment	of	pain.
Steroids	by	mouth	or	by	muscle	injection	are	useful	for	aggressive
short-term	pain	treatments,	but	they	are	not	usually	used	for	long-term
pain	management	because	of	the	potential	for	severe	side	effects.	(One
exception	is	the	patient	with	severe	chronic	arthritis	who	may	be	placed
on	a	long-term	steroid	regimen	to	treat	and	limit	the	progression	of	the
disease.)
Side	Effects	and	Complications

--- PAGE 46 ---

Steroids	carry	the	risk	of	multiple	potential	complications,	and	the
probability	of	having	complications	depends	on	how	much	steroid
actually	gets	into	the	bloodstream.	The	adrenal	glands	cannot	tell	the
difference	between	each	of	the	different	types	of	steroids,	and	if	the
adrenals	detect	enough	steroid	and	for	a	long	enough	period	of	time,
they	will	cut	back	or	potentially	shut	down	production	of	the	body’s
natural	steroids.	When	used	over	long	periods	of	time,	steroids	can	cause
elevated	blood	sugar	and	therefore	diabetes,	high	blood	pressure,
osteoporosis	(a	lack	of	calcium	in	the	bones),	thinning	of	the	skin,	and
changes	to	the	distribution	of	fat	around	the	shoulders	(otherwise	known
as	a	dowager’s	hump).	Most	importantly,	if	the	adrenal	glands	shut
down,	they	don’t	make	
adrenaline
,	and	that	can	be	life	threatening
because	your	body	needs	adrenaline	to	help	your	heart	beat	stronger
during	emergencies.	The	classic	example	we	see	is	an	athlete	who	takes
steroids	to	bulk	up	muscles	(a	different	type	of	steroid	than	is	used	for
pain),	but	remember,	the	body	can’t	tell	the	difference	between	the	types
of	steroids	and	the	adrenal	glands	will	start	to	shut	down.	That’s	fine,	as
long	as	they	continue	to	use	the	steroids,	but	if	they	stop	taking	the
steroids	(so	they	won’t	test	positive	on	a	urine	test,	for	example)	and
then	need	adrenaline	to	work	while	on	the	field	or	court,	they	could
have	a	life-threatening	collapse	of	basic	body	functions.	Androgenic
steroids	can	also	affect	the	heart	and	lead	to	arrhythmias	(irregular
heartbeats)	or	a	heart	attack.
Non-Steroidal	Anti-Inflammatories
Interventional	pain	physicians	also	use	non-steroidal	
anti-
inflammatories
	(NSAIDs).	The	first	of	these	developed	was	aspirin
(acetylsalicyclic	acid),	and	it	is	still	a	very	effective	anti-inflammatory
medicine.	Motrin
®
	(ibuprofen)	was	introduced	in	1974,	and	was	released
as	an	over-the-counter	(OTC)	medication	in	1984.	This	was	followed	by
Aleve
®
	(naproxen),	Feldene
®
	(piroxicam),	Lodine
®
	(etodolac),	Voltaren
®
(diclofenac),	Oravail
®
	(ketoprofen),	and	Toradol
®
	(ketorolac),	as	well	as
many	others.	Today,	there	are	too	many	different	NSAIDs	to	provide	a
comprehensive	picture	of	each	one.	This	class	of	medications	acts	to
reduce	inflammation	and	swelling,	thereby	decreasing	pain.	When	one
doesn’t	work	it	is	worth	trying	another,	as	it	is	often	hard	to	predict

--- PAGE 47 ---

which	NSAID	will	work	for	which	patient.	These	medicines,	though	not
as	strong	as	steroids,	can	be	very	effective	anti-inflammatory	agents,
without	the	potential	diabetes,	osteoporosis,	and	adrenal	effects.
Side	Effects	and	Complications
Aspirin	and	other	NSAIDs	can	cause	stomach	ulceration	and	stomach
bleeding,	which	kills	16,000	people	per	year.	Aspirin	will	also	prevent
the	platelets	(small	particles	in	the	blood	that	help	the	blood	to	clot)
from	working	for	the	life	of	the	platelet,	which	is	about	ten	days.	So	if
you	had	surgery	or	injections	done	within	about	ten	days	of	taking	a
regular	dose	of	aspirin,	you	could	be	at	an	increased	risk	for	bleeding.
This	is	why	most	people	are	told	to	stop	aspirin	two	weeks	before
surgery	or	any	major	invasive	injections.	Baby	aspirin	(81	mg	or	less)
does	not	seem	to	cause	as	much	of	a	platelet	problem,	but	it	is	still
important	to	check	with	your	doctor	prior	to	any	injections.	Your	doctor
will	counsel	you	regarding	whether	or	not	you	need	to	stop	aspirin	and
for	how	long.	Other	NSAIDs	inhibit	the	platelets	for	only	about	a	day	or
two,	and	therefore	have	less	risk	of	bleeding,	though	they	still	can	cause
significant	stomach	irritation	and	stomach	bleeding.
Non-steroidal	anti-inflammatory	medicines	can	also	damage	the
kidneys	if	they	are	taken	in	large	doses	for	long	periods	of	time.
Unfortunately,	because	many	are	now	available	without	a	prescription,
and,	because	people	believe	that	a	medication	must	be	safe	if	you	can
buy	it	over	the	counter,	a	significant	number	of	patients	die	because
their	use	of	these	anti-inflammatory	medications	is	not	being	monitored.
Not-So-New	Advances
Around	2001,	a	brand	new	type	of	anti-inflammatory	medicine	was
developed,	which	isolated	some	of	the	beneficial	effects	while	limiting
the	negative	effects.	Two	types	of	enzymes,	COX	1	and	COX	2,	are
involved	in	the	body’s	response	to	trauma.	COX	1	enzymes	control	the
activity	of	the	platelets	and	make	up	the	protective	lining	of	the
stomach;	COX	2	is	involved	with	pain,	fever,	and	inflammation.	This
new	type	of	anti-inflammatory	inhibits	COX	2	(preventing	pain)	but	not

--- PAGE 48 ---

COX	1	(so	there	is	not	a	problem	with	the	platelets	or	the	lining	of	the
stomach).	The	first	drug	developed	was	celecoxib	(Celebrex
®
)	and	then	a
second	drug,	rofecoxib	(Vioxx
®
),	was	developed.	Although	these	two
medicines	are	in	the	same	class,	rofecoxib	is	metabolized	to	a	medicine
that	interferes	with	the	body’s	blood-pressure	system	and	therefore	could
cause	increased	blood	pressure	(which	we	now	know	leads	to	an
increased	risk	of	heart	attacks	and	strokes).	Because	Vioxx
®
	was
associated	with	a	theoretical	increased	risk	of	heart	attacks	and	strokes,
it	was	taken	off	the	market.	Celebrex
®
	is	not	metabolized	in	that	way,
does	not	interfere	with	blood	pressure,	and	does	not	increase	the	risk	of
heart	attacks	and	strokes	(or	at	least	not	any	more	than	all	anti-
inflammatory	medications	do).	Celebrex
®
,	therefore,	is	still	on	the
market	and	may	be	very	useful	for	pain	immediately	before	and	after
surgery	or	to	prevent	pain	from	surgery.	Because	it	doesn’t	cause	platelet
problems,	Celebrex
®
	can	be	used	safely	during	surgery	without	an
increased	risk	of	bleeding.
Anticonvulsants
There	are	several	different	types	of	pain,	and	each	seems	to	respond
better	to	particular	types	of	medication.	Nerve	pain,	for	instance,	does
not	respond	well	to	opioids	(except	perhaps	methadone).	However,
nerve	pain	responds	much	better	to	
anti-seizure	medications
,	also
known	as	
anticonvulsants
.	Anticonvulsants	stabilize	nerve	membranes
and	prevent	excessive	firing	of	nerves	that	cause	seizures.	In	a	similar
way,	these	drugs	help	to	decrease	the	spontaneous	firing	of	nerves	that
can	be	seen	with	nerve	injuries.	Anticonvulsants	diminish	pain	by
making	it	less	likely	that	nerves	will	fire	at	all	and	lessen	the	intensity	of
the	discharge	when	they	do.	Gabapentin	(Neurontin
®
)	is	a	drug	that	was
initially	approved	by	the	FDA	to	treat	seizures	in	children,	but	was	later
approved	to	treat	nerve	pain,	once	its	usefulness	for	this	indication	was
established.
Side	Effects	and	Complications
Older	anti-seizure	medicines,	such	as	Dilantin
®
	and	Tegretol
®
,	can	cause

--- PAGE 49 ---

significant	liver	and	blood	problems.	Patients	on	these	medications	need
regular	blood	tests	to	monitor	liver	function.	Newer	anti-seizure
medicines	such	as	Neurontin
®
	(gabapentin),	Topamax
®
	(topiramate),
and	Lyrica
®
	(pregabalin)	do	not	have	those	same	toxicities	and	do	not
need	to	be	monitored	with	blood	tests.	All	these	medicines	have
potential	for	sleepiness	and	sedation,	so	they	are	usually	started	just	at
night.	However,	to	get	adequate	pain	relief,	they	usually	need	to	be	used
in	higher	doses	throughout	the	day.	Your	doctor	will	provide	you	with	a
specific	schedule	that	will	slowly	get	you	to	the	dosage	you	need	for
optimal	relief.	You	will	need	to	use	caution	at	first	while	driving	or	using
heavy	machinery	because,	even	though	these	are	not	opioids,	they	can
still	alter	your	ability	to	function	normally.	Once	you	are	on	a	stable
dose	and	if	you	have	no	side	effects,	then	it	should	be	safe	to	operate	a
car.	In	general,	a	good	rule	of	thumb	is	to	try	to	avoid	driving	for	48
hours	after	any	potentially	sedating	medication	is	started	or	your	dosage
is	increased.
Antidepressants
Patients	who	suffer	from	chronic	pain	have	a	very	high	rate	of
depression,	and	people	who	are	depressed	often	develop	chronic	pain.	In
fact,	pain	treatment	is	rarely	successful	if	a	patient	is	experiencing
depression	that	isn’t	being	adequately	treated.	
Antidepressants
	are	an
extremely	important	tool	in	the	management	of	pain.	Several	different
classes	of	medications	have	antidepressant	qualities:
Tricyclic	Antidepressants	(TCAs)
These	medicines	(such	as	amitriptyline,	desipramine,	and	trazodone)	are
some	of	the	earliest	antidepressants	and	can	be	very	effective	for	treating
some	types	of	nerve	pain	such	as	peripheral	neuropathy,	migraines,	and
fibromyalgia.	Unfortunately,	they	also	have	a	variety	of	side	effects
including	dry	mouth,	constipation,	irregular	heartbeat,	and	a	drop	in
blood	pressure	when	you	stand	up.	Trazodone	can	increase	the	risk	of
prolonged	erection	(priapism)	in	males,	which	can	lead	to	impotence	if
untreated.	On	the	other	hand,	the	sedative	property	of	tricyclics	can	be

--- PAGE 50 ---

useful	in	treating	insomnia,	and	these	medications	are	usually	used	at
nighttime	in	low	doses	(much	lower	doses	than	when	used	to	treat
depression).	Of	all	the	antidepressants,	
tricyclic	antidepressants	have	the
most	evidence	of	working	well,	and	they	are	still	often	used	as	first-line
drugs	in	pain	management.
Selective	Serotonin	Reuptake	Inhibitors	(SSRIs)
Serotonin	is	one	of	the	major	chemicals	in	the	brain,	and	a	lack	of
serotonin	is	associated	with	depression.	Selective	serotonin	reuptake
inhibitors	(SSRIs)	prevent	the	body	from	breaking	down	serotonin	and
therefore	raise	the	serotonin	levels	at	the	nerve	endings.	Prozac
®
(fluoxetine)	was	the	first	SSRI	developed,	and	there	are	now	several
others,	such	as	Zoloft
®
	(sertraline),	Paxil
®
	(paroxetine),	Celexa
®
(citalopram),	and	Lexapro
®
	(escitalopram).	Although	these	medicines
are	very	effective	for	treating	depression	and	have	fewer	side	effects
than	tricyclic	antidepressants,	there	is	no	good	evidence	of	their
usefulness	in	treating	painful	conditions,	unless	the	pain	is	being	caused
by	depression	itself.	These	medications	can	potentially	cause	a
significant	decrease	in	sexual	drive	and/or	pleasure,	which	could
potentially	lead	to	marital	unhappiness.
Serotonin	Norepinephrine	Reuptake	Inhibitors	(SNRIs)
Another	chemical	in	the	brain	involved	with	depression	is
norepinephrine	(noradrenaline).	This	compound	is	similar	to	adrenaline
(also	known	as	epinephrine),	which	is	produced	by	the	adrenal	glands,
but	norepinephrine	is	made	in	the	brain.	Serotonin	norepinephrine
reuptake	inhibitor	(SNRI)	medications	prevent	the	body	from	breaking
down	norepinephrine	and	serotonin,	which	allows	both	levels	to	increase
in	the	brain	and	reverse	depression.	Medications	such	as	Effexor
®
(venlafaxine)	and	Cymbalta
®
	(duloxetine)	fall	into	this	category.	These
seem	to	have	fewer	sexual	side	effects,	and	good	evidence	exists	to	show
they	are	effective	for	pain	relief.	In	fact,	Cymbalta
®
	is	approved	by	the
FDA	for	treatment	of	both	depression	and	painful	diabetic	peripheral
neuropathy.	Because	of	the	increase	of	norepinephrine,	SNRIs	may	be

--- PAGE 51 ---

associated	with	elevated	blood	pressure	and	agitation.
Anti-Anxiety	Medications	(Anxiolytics)
Many	chronic	pain	patients	also	feel	as	though	they	have	anxiety.
Depression	is	also	often	misdiagnosed	as	anxiety.	But	many	patients	do
not	realize	that	adrenaline	(epinephrine),	which	is	released	by	the	body
when	it	is	under	stress,	will	cause	symptoms	of	anxiety	such	as	a	rapid
heart	rate,	agitation,	nervousness,	and	difficulty	
sleeping.	Unfortunately,
anxiolytic
	medicines	such	as	Valium
®
	(diazepam)	or	Xanax
®
(alprazolam)	only	mask	the	symptoms	and	are	also	potentially	addictive.
These	medicines	work	at	the	same	level	of	the	brain	as	alcohol	and,	just
like	with	alcohol,	the	feeling	of	relief	is	only	an	illusion.	Most	of	us
realize	that	using	alcohol	to	“steady	nerves”	or	to	“relax”	or	to	“get
through	the	day”	are	signs	of	alcohol	dependence;	yet	we	have	patients
using	those	same	words	to	describe	the	need	for	
anti-anxiety
medications
.	If	you	are	having	symptoms	of	anxiety,	it	is	important	to
identify	why	you	have	the	symptoms	and	to	treat	the	cause	of	the
anxiety,	not	the	symptoms.	Most	pain	doctors	avoid	these	kinds	of
medicines	for	long-term	use	because	of	the	potential	for	addiction.
Muscle	Relaxants
When	a	body	part	is	injured,	the	muscles	around	that	area	go	into	spasm
to	protect	the	injured	structure	by	limiting	movement.	Unfortunately,
this	decreased	movement	can	actually	cause	more	pain,	and	a	decrease
in	mobility	leads	to	deconditioning	and	a	downward	spiral	in	function.
Therefore,	muscle	relaxants	are	used	to	prevent	this	part	of	the	body’s
natural	response	mechanism.	Most	muscle	relaxers,	such	as	Skelaxin
®
,
Robaxin
®
,	and	Flexeril
®
,	only	work	indirectly	on	the	skeletal	muscles
themselves.	Instead,	most	muscle	relaxants	work	in	the	brain	to	decrease
the	number	of	spasm	signals,	so	they	only	work	indirectly	on	the
muscles.	This	is	also	the	way	that	medicines	like	Valium
®
	(diazepam)
and	Soma
®
	(carisoprodol)	work.	Though	frequently	prescribed,	Soma
®
can	be	a	dangerous	compound	because	it	is	metabolized	to	a	very
addictive	medicine	that	has	been	taken	off	the	market.	Soma
®
,	like

--- PAGE 52 ---

alcohol,	increases	the	risk	of	respiratory	depression	and	death	from
opioids,	and	should	not	be	a	first-line	muscle	relaxant.	Pain	physicians
sometimes	use	more	powerful	muscle	relaxants	such	as	baclofen	and
Zanaflex
®
	(tizanidine),	which	were	originally	used	to	treat	spasticity	of
spinal	cord	injuries	and	cerebral	palsy.	Unlike	Valium
®
	and	Soma
®
,
baclofen
	and	Zanaflex
®
	are	not	addictive	and	actually	treat	the	muscle
spasticity	itself.	Prolonged	muscle	spasm	is	usually	related	to	an
underlying	cause	that,	if	treatable,	should	be	addressed	rather	than
trying	to	treat	spasm	that	has	an	underlying	stimulus.	For	instance,
chronic	spasm	on	one	side	of	the	back	can	be	due	to	a	leg	length
discrepancy,	which	causes	an	altered	gait.	A	shoe	lift	may	resolve	the
problem.	Alternatively,	the	spasm	could	be	secondary	to	a	
disc
herniation
	and	require	treatment	directed	at	this	problem.
Medical	Marijuana
Very	few	medications	are	as	controversial	as	marijuana.	It	has	been	used
as	a	medicine	for	thousands	of	years,	but	the	FDA	considers	it	a	highly
abusable	drug	with	no	legitimate	medical	purpose.	Under	federal	law,	it
is	a	controlled,	illegal	substance.	To	make	matters	more	confusing,	14
states	have	defied	the	federal	government	and	made	
medical	marijuana
legal.	The	federal	government	has	not	decided	what	to	do	at	this	point,
but	to	date	there	has	been	no	major	show	down	over	these	conflicting
laws.	Pain	physicians	have	to	grapple	with	this	inconsistency	when
deciding	how	to	deal	with	the	patient	who	is	using	marijuana.
Marijuana	contains	cannabinoids,	chemical	compounds	named	after
the	plant’s	genus,	
Cannabis
.	Cannabinoid	receptors	are	found	throughout
the	body:	in	the	brain,	in	the	gut,	in	the	eyes,	and	on	white	blood	cells.
The	presence	of	cannabinoid	receptors	and	the	known	positive	effects
that	it	causes	would	suggest	that	there	is	some	role	for	medical
marijuana.	It	has	been	touted	to	help	glaucoma,	
chemotherapy
-induced
nausea,	and	medical-related	weight	loss	(for	example,	from	cancer	or
HIV).	Research	in	this	area	is	growing	but	is	slow	to	arrive.	Perhaps	this
is	because	most	research	money	comes	from	federal	government	funding
and	since	they	consider	it	illegal,	it	has	been	hard	to	conduct	research
that	would	determine	just	what	these	compounds	actually	do	and,
therefore,	define	the	role	of	medical	marijuana.

--- PAGE 53 ---

Even	if	it	does	have	a	medicinal	role,	unscrupulous	doctors	have	been
prescribing	medical	marijuana	to	anyone	who	has	the	cash	to	pay	for	it,
and	“pot	mills”	have	sprung	up	all	over	the	country.	In	California,	it	has
been	estimated	that	there	are	more	medical	marijuana	clinics	than	there
are	McDonald’s	restaurants.	Until	more	research	is	done,	most	legitimate
pain	doctors	will	be	very	leery	of	medical	marijuana	and	will	prescribe	it
very	sparingly,	if	at	all,	to	carefully	selected	patients.

--- PAGE 54 ---

CHAPTER	8
TRIGGER	POINT
INJECTIONS:	TREATING
TIGHT	AND	RESTRICTED
MUSCLES
M
uscles	are	actually	made	of	millions	of	microscopic	muscle	fibers	that
consist	of	two	proteins	that	come	together	and	interlock,	like	the	fingers
of	your	hands.	Muscles	require	oxygen	and	nutrients	to	contract	and
release.	When	they	don’t	get	the	oxygen	that	they	need	to	release	them
from	the	contracted	state,	they	can	end	up	in	a	state	of	spasm.	Trigger
points	occur	when	over-stimulated	muscle	fibers	do	not	have	enough
oxygen	to	release	from	their	interlocked	state.	Trigger	point	pain,	also
called	myofascial	pain,	describes	a	condition	in	muscles	that	results	from
a	lack	of	blood	flow	(ischemia)	in	a	section	of	muscle:	tiny	contractions,
or	knots,	develop	in	a	muscle	when	it	is	injured	or	overworked.	Trigger
points	affect	muscles	by	keeping	them	both	tight	(because	of	the	spasm)
and	weak	(because	the	muscle	is	chronically	overworked).	These	taut
bands	of	muscle	keep	constant	tension	on	the	muscle’s	attachments,
which	causes	inflammation	of	the	tendon	
(tendonitis)
,	and	tension	on
the	joint	capsule,	which	causes	joint	pain	
(arthralgia)
.	The	constant
tension	in	the	fibers	of	the	trigger	point	itself	restricts	blood	flow	in	the
immediate	muscle	region;	this	causes	an	accumulation	of	metabolic
byproducts	such	as	lactic	acid,	which	cause	soreness	in	the	muscle	and
stimulates	more	spasm,	creating	a	vicious	cycle.
Those	resulting	knots	or	taut	bands	in	the	muscles	can	cause	local
pain.	This	is	often	misdiagnosed	as	arthritis.	The	knots	are	very	irritable,

--- PAGE 55 ---

and	pressure	on	them	(or	touching	the	spot	with	a	needle)	can	cause	the
muscle	to	twitch	or	jump.	They	may	also	cause	pain	in	other	areas	of	the
body,	a	phenomenon	called	
referred	pain
.	This	can	result	in	headaches,
neck	and	jaw	pain,	hand	pain,	
abdominal	pain,	pelvic	pain,	and	foot	and
leg	pain.	Trigger	points	can	also	mimic	heartburn,	heart	attacks,
appendicitis,	migraines,	and	
sciatica
	as	well	as	cause	dizziness,	nausea,
heart	
arrhythmias
,	and	numbness	of	the	hands	and	feet.	When	some
muscles	develop	trigger	points,	the	spasm	or	contracture	of	that
musculature	can	place	pressure	on	adjacent	nervous	structures	and
mimic	pain	from	nerve	compression,	causing	pain	going	down	the	leg	or
arm	
(pseudoradicular	symptoms)
	(
figure	8.1
).
Because	the	symptoms	can	be	so	diverse,	and	because	the	pain	may	be
coming	from	an	area	widely	separated	from	the	muscle	that	is	causing
the	pain,	the	origin	of	myofascial	pain	can	often	be	difficult	to	pinpoint.
This	diagnostic	dilemma	is	exemplified	by	the	experience	some	people
have	during	a	heart	attack	in	which	they	have	arm	pain	but	don’t	have
chest	pain.	That	pain	pattern	occurs	because	the	nerves	that	go	to	the
heart	and	the	nerves	that	go	to	the	arm	come	together	at	the	same	level
of	the	spinal	column,	and	the	brain	interprets	the	pain	as	coming	from
the	arm.	If	doctors	didn’t	recognize	that	pain	pattern,	patients	might	be
sent	for	arm	x-rays	instead	of	an	EKG	to	evaluate	the	heart.
Recognizing	the	pattern	of	pain	when	taking	a	history	and	identifying
the	painful	points	that	can	be	felt	on	physical	exam	can	give	the	pain
physician	clues	to	the	cause	of	the	pain.	Unfortunately,	trigger	point
pain	referral	patterns	are	not	always	recognized,	and	there	is	no
equivalent	of	an	EKG	for	diagnosis	of	the	problem.	Most	conventional
approaches	to	the	treatment	of	pain	generally	operate	on	the	assumption
that	the	cause	of	pain	will	be	found	at	the	site	of	the	pain.	Trigger	points
almost	always	cause	pain	elsewhere,	and	although	the	trigger	point	site
might	be	painful	as	well,	sometimes	there	is	only	pain	at	the	referral	site,
like	in	the	heart	attack/arm	example.	The	best	way	to	confirm	the
diagnosis	is	by	injecting	local	anesthetic	into	the	affected	muscle	to	see	if
the	pain	goes	away.
Activation	of	trigger	points	may	be	caused	by	a	number	of	factors.
These	may	include	acute	or	chronic	muscle	overload,	activation	by	other
trigger	points,	or	disorders	such	as	an	underactive	thyroid.	Psychological
distress,	chemical	imbalances	such	as	low	potassium,	hormone

--- PAGE 56 ---

imbalances	such	as	low	estrogen,	direct	trauma	to	the	region,	nerve
irritation,	infections,	and	health	issues	such	as	smoking	can	also	cause
trigger	points.
Fibromyalgia	is	another	condition	that	is	often	mistaken	for	trigger
point	pain.	Fibromyalgia	is	characterized	by	widespread	pain	and
tenderness	and	is	thought	to	be	related	to	increased	brain	
recognition	of
pain	that	gives	rise	to	deep	tissue	tenderness	that	includes	muscles.
Trigger	point	or	myofascial	pain	is	pain	from	muscles	and	fascia	(the
lining	of	the	muscles).	These	two	distinct	problems	must	be	correctly
identified	to	be	effectively	treated.	Physicians	who	specialize	in
fibromyalgia	usually	manage	the	diagnosis	and	treatment	of
fibromyalgia,	and	it	is	beyond	the	scope	of	this	book.
Trigger	points	can	be	secondary	to	other	underlying	injuries/problems
and	may	accompany	many	other	painful	conditions,	representing
another	component	of	the	
chronic	pain
	syndrome.	Treatment	of	the
primary	underlying	problem	often	leads	to	spontaneous	resolution	of	the
associated	secondary	trigger	points.	If	symptoms	don’t	improve	with
treatment	directed	solely	at	a	
myofascial	pain	syndrome
,	then	one
should	look	for	other	underlying	conditions	that	may	be	causing	the
secondary	trigger	points	to	occur.
Treatment	Options
A	common	treatment	for	trigger	point	pain	involves	injections	given	in
the	office.	These	injections	(often	simply	called	trigger	point	injections)
may	be	classified	as	“active”	or	“latent”	(present,	but	not	active)	and
also	as	“key”	(primary)	versus	“satellite”	(secondary).	Sometimes	there
are	trigger	points	present	that	aren’t	causing	you	current	pain	symptoms.
Primary	trigger	points	are	the	ones	causing	the	majority	of	your
symptoms,	and	secondary	ones,	while	painful,	are	not	the	primary	cause
of	your	pain.	Successfully	treating	the	key	trigger	point	will	often	resolve
the	satellite	trigger	points,	but	occasionally	the	satellites	need	treatment
too	or	they	stimulate	the	other	triggers	to	recur.
Injections	provide	immediate	relief	and	can	confirm	the	diagnosis.	If
injection	of	a	trigger	point	in	the	back	relieves	chest	pain,	you	can	be
pretty	certain	that	the	chest	pain	is	not	related	to	your	heart.	These
injections	into	muscles	should	be	of	local	anesthetic	only,	because

--- PAGE 57 ---

steroids	in	the	muscles	can	cause	tissue	damage.	This	does	not	totally
negate	the	use	of	steroids,	because	it	may	be	reasonable	to	inject	steroids
into	inflamed	tendons.	
Dry	needling
	(placing	needles	into	specific
points	of	the	muscle	without	injecting	medicine)	can	be	just	as	effective
but	may	cause	more	post-injection	soreness.	
Botulinum	toxin
	(more
widely	recognized	as	Botox
®
)	may	occasionally	be	indicated,	if	trigger
point	injections	give	only	temporary	relief.	Botox
®
	can	provide	more
sustained	relief;	however,	
it	can	be	difficult	to	get	approval	from	your
insurance	carrier	because	the	drug	is	more	widely	recognized	for	its
cosmetic	uses.	Botox
®
	injections	cannot	be	injected	into	the	same	muscle
group	more	often	than	once	every	three	months.	Sarapin
®
	(the	extract	of
the	pitcher	plant)	has	also	been	used	to	provide	more	sustained	relief.
Doctors	and	physical	therapists	may	use	deep	tissue	massage
(neuromuscular	therapy),	pulsed	
ultrasound,	electrostimulation,
ischemic	compression	(acupressure)
,	dry	needling,	“spray	and	stretch”
using	a	cooling	(vapo-coolant)	spray,	or	low-level	laser	therapy	in	place
of,	or	in	conjunction	with,	injections.	In	addition	to	formal	physical
therapy,	it	is	extremely	important	that	the	patient	perform	a	stretching
program	at	home	between	physical	therapy	sessions.	A	successful
treatment	protocol	relies	on	identifying	trigger	points,	deactivating	the
trigger	points,	and	then	stretching	the	affected	muscles	along	their
natural	range	of	motion	and	length.	If	the	stretching	is	not	performed,
the	muscle	will	simply	return	to	its	original	position	where	trigger	points
are	likely	to	redevelop.

--- PAGE 58 ---

CHAPTER	9
PERIPHERAL	NERVE
BLOCKS:	INJECTIONS
IN	OTHER	PLACES
AND	SPACES
Y
our	body	is	covered	with	nerves,	both	on	the	skin	and	in	the	deep
tissues.	Central	nerves	are	those	in	the	spinal	column	and	brain;
peripheral	nerves
	are	those	outside	the	spinal	column.	Each	of	these
nerves	goes	to	a	different	part	of	the	body,	and	when	these	nerves	are
trapped,	they	cause	pain	in	a	predictable	pattern.	Nerves	travel	in
pathways	and	canals,	and	swelling	can	trap	them.	You	can	visualize
those	nerves	as	your	finger,	and	the	canal	they	run	in	would	be	a	ring	on
that	finger.	If	your	finger	is	traumatized	and	starts	to	swell,	it	becomes
hard	to	pull	off	the	ring—and	the	harder	you	try	to	pull	off	the	ring,	the
more	swollen	the	finger	becomes.
Nerve	entrapment	can	also	cause	pain	in	areas	of	the	body	other	than
the	site	of	entrapment.	This	is	called	
“referred	pain.”
	As	an	example,
when	someone	is	having	a	heart	attack,	he	may	feel	pain	going	down	his
arm	but	may	not	have	any	chest	pain	at	all.	This	is	because	the	nerves
that	go	to	the	heart	come	into	the	spinal	column	at	the	same	level	as	the
arm	nerves,	and	the	brain	interprets	that	pain	as	coming	from	the	arm.
Without	knowing	this	referral	pattern,	a	physician	might	mistakenly
think	the	problem	is	coming	from	the	nerves	in	the	neck	and	recommend
surgery	instead	of	an	evaluation	by	a	
cardiologist
.
An	injection	by	an	interventional	pain	physician	can	numb	a	nerve,
and,	if	that	makes	the	pain	go	away,	it	confirms	the	cause	of	the	pain.	At

--- PAGE 59 ---

the	same	time,	the	pain	physician	can	add	a	time-released	steroid
medication,	which	acts	to	decrease	swelling.	Peripheral	nerve	blocks,
then,	can	be	both	diagnostic	and	therapeutic;	in	other	words,	these
injections	can	help	make	the	diagnosis	as	well	as	treat	the	
problem.	In
this	chapter	we	will	discuss	some	of	the	most	common	nerve
entrapments,	although	many	others	are	now	recognized.
As	you	will	see,	peripheral	nerve	entrapments	can	occur	from	the	top
of	the	head	to	the	toes.	A	knowledgeable	interventional	pain	physician
can	diagnose	the	issue	and	treat	the	nerves	in	an	effective	manner.
Knowing	the	cause	of	pain	can	help	the	physician	treat	the	problem
effectively	and	will	decrease	unnecessary	and	potentially	dangerous
surgeries	and	therapies.
Head	and	Neck
The	
supraorbital	nerve
	runs	from	the	top	of	the	eye	to	the	forehead
(
figure	9.1
).	This	nerve	can	become	trapped	by	frowning,	squinting,	and
fluid	retention	(such	as	just	before	a	woman’s	menstrual	period).	This	is
often	mistaken	for	migraines,	sinusitis,	and	cluster	headaches.
The	
infraorbital	nerve
	comes	out	of	the	skull	just	below	the	eye	and
sends	branches	to	the	upper	teeth	(
figure	9.1
).	Blows	to	the	face,	cheek
fractures,	or	dental	procedures	can	injure	this	nerve,	and	smiling	or
brushing	your	teeth	can	irritate	the	nerve.	Patients	often	have	multiple
dental	procedures	or	are	misdiagnosed	as	having	sinusitis	when	this
nerve	is	inflamed.
The	
mental	nerve
	is	found	near	the	point	of	the	chin,	and	it	gives
sensation	to	the	lower	lip	and	teeth	(
figure	9.1
).	This	nerve	can	be
injured	during	dental	procedures	and	by	jaw	trauma	or	dentures.
The	
auriculotemporal	nerve
	is	the	nerve	most	commonly	associated
with	headaches	and	migraines	(
figure	9.1
).	Located	in	the	temple	next	to
an	artery,	this	nerve	can	be	irritated	by	the	muscle	in	the	temple,
especially	with	chewing	or	clenching.
The	
occipital	nerves
	are	located	at	the	back	of	the	head	and	are	a
common	cause	of	migraines	(
figure	9.1
).	These	nerves	can	be	injured	as
they	pass	between	the	upper	bones	of	the	neck	(such	as	is	seen	with
whiplash)	or	irritated	by	the	muscles	of	the	shoulder	and	neck,	which
attach	at	the	base	of	the	skull	around	these	nerves.

--- PAGE 60 ---

Upper	Limb
The	
suprascapular	nerve
	runs	along	the	top	of	the	shoulder	blade	and
gives	sensation	to	the	muscles	of	the	shoulder	and	the	shoulder	joint
itself.	Car	accidents	(especially	when	clenching	the	steering	wheel)	or
lifting	objects	like	suitcases	can	cause	trauma	to	this	nerve,	which	causes
pain	to	radiate	down	the	arm	and	mimics	a	pinched	nerve	in	the	neck.
The	
radial	nerve
	(see	
figure	9.2
)	can	be	trapped	several	places	along
the	arm.	It	can	be	injured	on	the	upper	arm	(by	fractures	of	the	upper
arm	bone,	or	
humerus
),	at	the	elbow	(referred	to	as	
lateral
epicondylitis
),	or	on	the	thumb	side	of	the	forearm	(superficial	radial
nerve).	All	these	will	cause	pain	to	radiate	down	the	arm	to	the	thumb
side	of	the	hand	and	can	mimic	pinched	nerves	in	the	neck.
In	the	same	way,	the	
ulnar	nerve
	(
figure	9.2
),	which	goes	to	the	little-
finger	side	of	the	hand,	can	be	trapped	or	traumatized	at	the	elbow	(the
“funny	bone”)	and,	less	commonly,	at	the	wrist.	Injection	of	this	nerve	at
the	level	of	the	elbow	(at	the	funny	bone)	is	generally	not	considered
safe	due	to	the	high	risk	of	injury	to	the	nerve	with	injection	into	a	very
tight	canal.
The	most	commonly	diagnosed	peripheral	nerve	entrapment	is	the
median	nerve	at	the	wrist.	This	nerve,	which	goes	primarily	to	the
middle	finger,	travels	through	an	arch	of	bones	in	the	wrist	(the	
carpal
bones
).	There	is	a	
ligament
	that	goes	across	this	C-shaped	arch	of
bones,	which	then	makes	a	canal	or	tunnel	(
figure	9.2
);	this	entrapment
is	commonly	called	carpal	tunnel	syndrome,	and	it’s	usually	diagnosed
with	a	test	called	a	
nerve	conduction	study
.	It	is	important	to
remember,	however,	that	not	all	pain	going	down	to	the	hand	comes
from	a	median	nerve	entrapment,	and	in	some	studies,	as	many	as	15%
of	patients	with	no	symptoms	at	all	will	have	positive	nerve	conduction
studies.	
Diagnostic	injections
	are	therefore	important	to	confirm	the
diagnosis	before	surgery,	and	because	these	injections	treat	the	swelling,
they	often	can	help	avoid	the	need	for	surgery.
Chest	and	Abdomen
Intercostal	nerves
,	the	nerves	that	travel	under	each	rib	from	the	spine
around	to	the	front,	can	be	injured	by	rib	fractures,	thoracic	surgery,	and

--- PAGE 61 ---

infections	such	as	shingles	(
figure	9.3
).	The	lower	intercostal	nerves
actually	travel	around	to	the	upper	abdomen	and	can	get	trapped	at	the
edge	of	the	
rectus	abdominus
,	the	muscle	that	runs	vertically	from	the
bottom	of	the	breastbone	to	the	top	of	the	pubic	bones.	This	muscle	is
what	creates	the	“six-pack	abs”	on	body	builders.	Nerves	trapped	at	the
edge	of	this	muscle	can	mimic	gallbladder	disease	or	stomach	ulcers.
The	nerves	coming	out	of	the	upper	back	also	travel	around	to	the
front	of	the	abdomen	and	can	be	trapped	by	the	same	muscle.	These
nerves,	which	are	called	the	subgastric,	ilioinguinal,	and	
iliohypogastric
nerves,	will	mimic	appendicitis	on	the	right	and	diverticulitis	on	the	left,
as	well	as	endometriosis	and	
interstitial	cystitis
	(
figure	9.3
).	Pain
worsens	with	bearing	down,	coughing,	bowel	movement,	and	lifting.
Women	often	notice	increased	pain	with	menstruation	and	sexual
intercourse.	Irritation	of	these	nerves	can	result	in	referred	pain	to	the
testicles	or	vaginal	area,	inner	thigh,	or	upper	back.
The	
genitofemoral	nerve
	also	comes	from	the	upper	back,	but	it
travels	deep	in	the	belly	until	it	crosses	over	at	the	top	of	the	pubic	bone
into	the	testicles	or	vaginal	region.	This	nerve	may	be	injured	by
abdominal	surgery	but	is	more	commonly	injured	with	“bikini”	incisions
(transverse	lower	abdominal)	or	hernia	repairs.	The	genitofemoral	nerve
carries	signals	into	the	genital	region	as	well	as	the	inner	thigh,	and	is
often	a	cause	of	pelvic	pain,	especially	during	sexual	intercourse.
The	pudendal	nerve	gives	sensation	to	the	area	between	the	tailbone
and	the	pubic	bone.	This	nerve	can	be	traumatized	by	bicycle	seats	and
straddling	injuries	and	is	unfortunately	a	very	common	cause	of	pain
after	childbirth.
Lower	Back
Turning	our	attention	now	to	the	back,	there	are	several	peripheral
nerves	that	can	cause	pain	to	be	felt	in	the	back,	buttock,	and/or	leg.
Because	the	term	
“sciatica”
	is	often	used	interchangeably	with
radiculopathy
	(i.e.	leg	pain	from	a	herniated	disc),	when	leg	pain	is
caused	by	something	other	than	this,	it	is	often	called	
“pseudosciatica”
or	“fake	sciatica”	to	differentiate	between	causes	(
figure	9.4
).	Studies
have	shown	that	as	many	as	30	to	60%	of	patients	with	no	back	pain	at
all	had	bulging	or	herniated	
discs
	on	MRI,	so	it’s	important	to	make	the

--- PAGE 62 ---

right	diagnosis.	Operating	on	a	herniated	disc	that	isn’t	causing	pain
won’t	make	someone	better.
The	
cluneal	nerve
	comes	from	the	top	of	the	lower	back	region	and
travels	across	the	top	of	the	hip	bones	(the	iliac	crest)	to	send	signals
into	the	buttocks	and	potentially	down	the	leg	(
figure	9.5
).	The	
superior
gluteal	nerve
	lies	lower	in	the	buttocks,	above	the	muscle	running	from
the	tailbone	to	the	side	of	the	hipbone	(the	
piriformis	muscle)
	and
enters	the	spinal	column	at	the	same	level	as	the	
sciatic	nerve
	(
figure
9.5
).	This	piriformis	muscle	can	also	trap	the	sciatic	nerve	and	mimic	a
herniated	disc.
Lower	Limb
The	
femoral	nerve
	runs	from	the	groin	onto	the	front	of	the	leg	and
then	down	the	inner	leg	to	the	foot	(
figure	9.6
).	One	of	the	biggest
branches	of	the	femoral	nerve	is	the	saphenous	nerve.	On	the	inner	side
of	the	knee	is	a	small	branch	of	the	
saphenous	nerve;
	because	it	runs
underneath	the	kneecap	
(patella)
,	it	is	called	the	
infrapatellar
saphenous	nerve
.	This	nerve	can	be	traumatized	by	knee	surgery,
especially	
arthroscopy
	or	total	knee	replacement,	and	can	cause
generalized	pain,	swelling,	and	redness,	mimicking	infection.	The
superficial	saphenous	nerve	travels	down	past	the	inner	side	of	the	ankle
where	it	can	be	injured	from	out-turning	ankle	injuries	and	sprains.	It
can	also	be	trapped	at	the	big	toe	by	bunions	or	tight-fitting	shoes.
On	the	outer	side	of	the	knee	is	the	
peroneal	nerve
,	a	branch	of	the
sciatic	nerve.	It	can	be	traumatized	at	the	bottom	of	the	knee	by	a	tight-
fitting	cast,	which	will	cause	weakness	of	the	foot	termed	
“foot	drop.”
	It
splits	into	two	branches.	The	
superficial	peroneal	branch
	travels	in
front	of	the	outer	side	of	the	ankle	where	it	can	be	injured	by	in-turning
ankle	sprains	or	fractures	of	the	thin	bone	in	the	lower	leg	called	the
fibula	(the	big	bone	is	called	the	tibia).	This	nerve	then	spreads	out	onto
the	top	of	the	foot.
Between	the	bones	of	the	foot	are	the	
digital	nerves
.	The	digital
nerve	between	the	big	toe	and	the	second	toe	is	the	second	branch	of	the
peroneal	nerve—the	
deep	peroneal	nerve
.	The	others	are	named	for	the
bones	they	lie	between;	for	instance,	the	digital	nerve	between	the
fourth	and	fifth	toes	is	called	digital	4/5.	Chronic	trauma	to	the	nerves

--- PAGE 63 ---

by	tight	shoes	can	cause	a	mass	to	grow	on	the	nerve	called	a	
Morton’s
neuroma
.	Though	this	classically	occurs	between	the	third	and	fourth
toes,	it	can	occur	between	any	of	the	toes.
The	inner	side	of	the	heel	is	
innervated
	by	the	
medial	calcaneal
nerve
,	which	is	often	mistaken	for	
plantar	fasciitis
.	A	similar	nerve	on
the	outer	side	is	called	the	
lateral	calcaneal	nerve
.	These	will	cause
heel	pain	and	are	often	associated	with	in-turning	or	out-turning	of	the
foot	with	walking.
Treatment	Options
To	confirm	the	diagnosis	of	a	peripheral	nerve	injury	as	the	cause	of
pain,	your	pain	physician	may	recommend	a	peripheral	nerve	block.
When	the	nerve	is	blocked	with	local	anesthetic,	pain	caused	by	that
nerve	should	typically	go	away.	This	could	include	all	of	the	pain	or	part
of	the	pain,	depending	on	whether	the	symptoms	are	coming	from	one
or	more	structure(s);	it	is	not	uncommon	for	nerve	injuries	to	be
associated	with	other	primary	or	secondary	musculoskeletal	problems.
Once	you	have	diagnosed	a	nerve	as	the	cause	of	pain,	how	do	you
treat	it?	The	diagnostic	injections,	which	usually	consist	of	local
anesthetic	and	steroid	(anti-inflammatory	medication),	often	provide
lasting	relief.	However,	if	the	injection	provides	only	temporary	relief,
there	are	a	few	longer-term	options.	Surgery	can	release	the	nerve,	but
subsequent	scar	tissue	can	re-entrap	the	nerve.
Nerve-killing	fluids	such	as	alcohol	or	
phenol
	can	create	inflammation
and	scarring	and	should	be	avoided	except	in	cancer	pain	or	with
spasticity	associated	with	spinal	cord	injuries.	Burning	the	nerve	with
radio	frequency	lesioning	can	also	cause	more	inflammation	and
increased	pain.	Some	physicians	are	using	pulsed	radio	frequency
lesioning	(lower	temperatures	and	less	destruction	by	pulsing	the
energy),	although	the	jury	is	still	out	as	to	the	exact	mechanism	of	action
and	the	level	of	effectiveness	of	this	approach.	
Cryoneuroablation
	is
still	likely	the	best	option	to	treat	these	nerve	entrapments	(see	
chapter
13
).	A	non-destructive	option	which	is	gaining	some	popularity	is
peripheral	nerve	stimulation	(see	
chapter	20
).
When	peripheral	nerves	are	damaged,	sometimes	the	body	responds	in
an	exaggerated	fashion,	this	‘wind-up’	of	the	nervous	system	can	result

--- PAGE 64 ---

in	the	development	of	a	diffuse	pain	syndrome,	involving	a	much	larger
area	of	the	body	(usually	an	extremity).	When	this	occurs	it	is	referred	to
as	
complex	regional	pain	syndrome
	type	II	or	
causalgia
	(see	
chapter
18
).

--- PAGE 65 ---

CHAPTER	10
EPIDURAL	INJECTIONS:
NOT	JUST	FOR
CHILDBIRTH
M
ost	people	are	familiar	with	epidurals	as	a	part	of	childbirth.	When	a
male	patient	hears	that	he	needs	an	epidural	to	treat	his	back	pain,	a
puzzled	expression	crosses	his	face.	Inevitably,	the	next	question	we	hear
is,	“Doc,	isn’t	that	what	they	did	for	my	wife	when	she	was	having	a
baby?”	Epidural	steroid	injections	are	one	of	the	most	commonly	used
interventional	pain	procedures	today,	and	they	can	be	used	for	a	wide
variety	of	different	problems.	There	are	many	different	types	of	epidural
steroid	injections.	Epidurals	for	childbirth	are	very	different	from
epidurals	for	low	back	pain.	What	makes	the	epidural	given	to	the
pregnant	woman	and	the	typical	epidural	given	to	the	pain	patient
different	is	the	type	and	amount	of	medication	used	in	the	injection,	as
well	as	the	exact	technique	and	location.
Part	of	the	confusion	about	this	common	procedure	stems	from	the
fact	that	many	people	refer	to	epidurals	as	“blocks,”	but	the	more
accurate	term	is	“epidural	steroid	injection.”	This	tells	you	where	the
injection	is	being	done	(the	
epidural	space
)	and	what	is	being	injected
(steroids).	A	“block”	is	a	generic	term	that	can	apply	to	many	different
types	of	injections.	Specifically,	epidural	steroid	injections	involve
placement	of	steroid	medication	into	and	around	the	nerves	of	the	spine
to	treat	nerve	irritation	and	inflammation.	These	injections	can	be
performed	at	just	about	any	level	of	the	spine,	although	the	technique
may	vary	in	location,	including	the	cervical,	thoracic,	lumbar,	and
caudal	regions.

--- PAGE 66 ---

Nerves	in	the	spine	can	become	irritated	from	a	variety	of	causes
including	nerve	compression,	nerve	trauma,	stenosis	(narrowing	of	
the
canal),	or	a	herniated	and/or	
leaking	disc.	Disc	herniation
	is	perhaps
the	most	well-known	cause	of	
sciatica
	(from	the	Greek	word	for	leg
pain),	that	mysterious	ailment	that	plagued	our	parents	and
grandparents.	Sciatica	is	often	unfairly	relegated	to	the	category	of	“old
people	complaints,”	but	it	can	happen	to	anyone	at	any	age.	Sciatica	is
really	a	generic	term	that	refers	to	irritation	or	inflammation	of	nerves
that	go	to	the	legs.	Your	physician	more	likely	will	properly	refer	to	this
as	a	
radiculopathy
	or	radiculitis	when	the	nerve	irritation	occurs	at	the
level	of	the	spine.	Think	about	the	nerves	of	your	back	as	long	strings
that	run	from	your	spine	to	your	legs.	If	you	light	the	string	on	fire	at	the
base	(near	your	spine),	eventually	the	fire	will	spread	to	the	other	end	of
the	string	(your	foot)	so	an	injured	nerve	in	your	back	can	cause	you	to
feel	pain	in	the	foot	if	that	is	where	the	nerve	ends.	The	site	of	pain
doesn’t	tell	us	what	caused	it,	so	we	try	to	avoid	general	terms	like
sciatica	and	instead	strive	to	be	specific	to	identify	the	cause	of	the	pain.
Some	specific	causes	of	radiculopathy	include	nerve
compression/irritation	from	a	herniated	disc	(
figure	4.2
)	or	bone	build-
up	from	arthritis	(bone	build-up	can	cause	nerve	compression,	see	
figure
4.3
).
If	you	shut	your	hand	in	a	car	door,	it	hurts;	it	still	hurts	when	you
take	your	hand	out	of	the	door,	and	then	your	hand	swells.	Single	nerves
(or	nerve	roots)	are	no	different	than	your	hand.	They	don’t	like	being
compressed,	and	the	affected	area	can	swell.	Now	imagine	that	the
spinal	canal
	is	a	ring	on	that	swollen	hand;	the	more	the	finger	swells,
the	tighter	the	ring	gets,	and	then	the	more	the	finger	swells.	Swelling
keeps	pressure	on	the	nerves,	and	the	nerves	become	irritated.	This
compression	or	nerve	irritation	in	the	spine	causes	you	to	feel	pain	in	the
area	where	that	nerve	normally	registers	sensation:	arm	nerves	(cervical)
cause	arm	pain,	mid-back	(thoracic)	nerves	cause	rib	pain,	and	leg
nerves	(lumbar	or	sacral)	cause	leg	pain.
Nerve	irritation/compression	from	overgrowth	of	bone	and/or
ligamentous	structures	is	referred	to	as	
spinal	stenosis
.	Stenosis	refers
to	a	narrowing	of	the	spinal	canal	and	can	occur	in	the	central	part	of
the	spine	or	off	to	the	sides	where	the	nerve	exits	the	spine,	also	referred
to	as	the	
lateral	recess
	or	foraminal	stenosis,	depending	on	how	far	out

--- PAGE 67 ---

to	the	side	the	narrowing	occurs.
A	third	cause	of	irritation	is	chemical	irritation.	Each	disc	in	your	back
is	filled	with	a	gel-like	substance	that	creates	a	cushion	between	the
discs
.	When	the	cushion	becomes	damaged,	it	can	crack	or	tear,	
and
some	of	the	fluid	can	leak	out	of	the	disc.	This	fluid	can	irritate	the
surrounding	nerves.	It	is	like	pouring	alcohol	on	a	cut.	The	alcohol
irritates	the	cut	and	it	hurts,	but	when	the	alcohol	is	washed	away,	the
burning	goes	away.
The	key	with	all	
interventional	pain	management
	procedures,
including	epidural	steroid	injections,	is	to	place	the	medication	as	close
as	possible	to	the	area	of	injury	or	inflammation.	When	the	nerve	is
compressed	from	either	a	disc	herniation	or	bone	overgrowth	affecting
the	central	spinal	canal,	then	placing	an	epidural	steroid	injection	in	the
center	of	the	spine	(also	called	an	
interlaminar
	or	midline	epidural
steroid	injection)	may	be	an	appropriate	technique	(
figure	4.4
	and	
10.1	a
and	
b
).	Often	the	location	of	the	problem	is	off	to	the	side	of	the	spinal
canal	(also	known	as	the	lateral	recess)	or	along	the	hole	where	the
nerve	exits	the	spinal	column,	the	neuroforamen,	(see	
chapter	4
).	In	this
case,	an	injection	into	the	foramen,	an	area	which	is	closer	to	the	nerve
compression,	is	more	likely	to	help.	When	the	needle	is	placed	into	the
foramen,	it	is	called	a	transforaminal	injection	(
figure	10.2
).
Another	technique	commonly	employed	in	the	lower	back	region	is	a
caudal	epidural	steroid	injection
.	In	this	technique,	a	needle	is	placed
though	an	opening	just	above	the	tailbone.	Dye	is	injected	to
demonstrate	appropriate	spread	of	contrast,	and	then	medicine	is
injected	(
figure	10.3	a
	and	
b
).
Using	a	
catheter
	is	another	way	to	perform	epidural	steroid	injections.
“Catheter”	is	another	word	that	people	cringe	at	when	mentioned,	but
your	pain	management	doctor	is	not	placing	a	catheter	into	your
bladder.	In	this	technique,	a	needle	is	placed	into	the	spine	and	then	a
catheter—a	thin,	flexible,	hollow	tube—is	inserted	through	the	needle,
pushed	out	the	tip	of	the	needle,	and	then	steered	into	the	area	of	nerve
inflammation.	The	
injectate
	(medications,	such	as	steroids	and	local
anesthetics)	is	then	placed	into	that	area	and	the	needle	and	catheter	are
removed	(
figure	10.4
).	This	is	a	common	technique	in	the	neck	or
cervical	region	and	also	in	the	caudal	region	for	specific	purposes,	such
as	treating	scar	tissue	in	patients	who	have	had	prior	surgery	(see

--- PAGE 68 ---

chapter	14
).
For	most	types	of	epidurals,	contrast	(dye)	is	injected	prior	to	the
steroid	to	prove	that	the	needle	is	in	the	correct	location	and	the
medication	is	spreading	appropriately.	For	IPM	(in	contrast	to	labor	or
operative	epidurals),	this	procedure	must	be	performed	under	radiologic
guidance	so	your	doctor	has	a	clear	view	of	the	area	and	can	precisely
document	the	location	of	the	final	needle	position	
since	they	typically
target	a	specific	nerve	or	level	and	want	to	know	the	response	at	that
specific	site.	Your	doctor	will	inject	contrast	into	the	area,	then	watch	as
the	dye	appears	on	the	picture	screen	of	the	
C-arm
	(the	machine	that
provides	radiological	guidance),	paying	particular	attention	to	the
direction	in	which	it	spreads.	Some	patients	are	concerned	because	of	a
history	of	contrast	allergy,	but	the	contrast	that	is	typically	used	for
epidural	steroid	injections	and	interventional	pain	management
procedures	has	a	very	low	risk	for	allergic	reaction	(and	does	not	closely
correlate	with	a	CT	scan	or	intravenous	dye	allergy).	Except	in	the	most
extreme	cases,	it	is	usually	safer	to	inject	the	contrast	to	accurately
determine	the	placement	of	the	needle	(before	placement	of	the	local
and	steroid)	than	it	is	to	perform	the	injection	without	this	information.
Possible	Complications
The	most	common	complication	that	can	occur	from	an	epidural	steroid
injection	is	a	
“wet	tap,”
	or	
dural	puncture
,	which	happens	when	the
needle	punctures	the	membrane	overlying	the	spinal	fluid	(the	dura).
Spinal	fluid	can	then	leak	through	the	hole	created	by	the	needle,	which
can	lead	to	a	post-dural	puncture	headache,	commonly	called	a	spinal
headache.	
Postdural	puncture	headaches
	can	occur	after	spinal	taps	or
lumbar	punctures	as	well	as	after	interventional	pain	procedures.	The
spinal	fluid	contained	within	the	spine	communicates	with	the	fluid	that
supports	the	brain.	The	leakage	of	spinal	fluid	means	there	is	also	less
spinal	fluid	for	the	brain	to	float	in.	So	when	you	stand	up,	the	brain
sags	or	falls	away	from	the	skull	and	stretches	veins	that	run	between
the	surface	of	the	brain	and	the	skull	internally,	which	causes	a
headache.	Common	treatments	include	increased	oral	fluids	(as	much	as
half	a	gallon	per	day),	increased	caffeine	consumption	(which	causes
vasoconstriction
,	or	shrinking	of	these	blood	vessels),	or	an	abdominal

--- PAGE 69 ---

binder	to	increase	the	pressure	in	the	belly,	which	increases	the	pressure
of	the	fluid	within	the	spinal	canal	and	forces	fluid	from	the	spinal
region	back	into	the	head.	But	the	most	effective	treatment	is	an
epidural	blood	patch
.	With	this	technique	the	patient’s	own	blood	is
injected	into	the	epidural	space	at	the	location	of	the	initial	needle
puncture	to	seal	the	hole	where	the	spinal	fluid	is	leaking;	this	forces
spinal	fluid	up	toward	the	head,	which	provides	almost	immediate
headache	relief.	Epidural	blood	patches	have	a	very	high	effectiveness
rate	(greater	than	95%)	and	usually	work	almost	immediately.	Patients
often	refer	to	it	as	a	“miracle	cure.”
Other	possible	complications	include	bleeding,	infection,	nerve	injury
or	trauma,	and	spinal	cord	injury.
After	the	Procedure
Patients	should	follow	up	with	either	the	ordering	physician	or	the
doctor	who	performed	the	procedure	about	two	weeks	after	the
procedure	to	discuss	the	results	of	the	injection.	You	may	feel	relief
immediately	after	the	procedure;	this	is	likely	due	to	the	local	anesthetic
used	in	the	injection,	and	its	effects	will	wear	off	in	one	to	three	hours.
The	steroids	used	in	the	injection	typically	take	three	to	seven	days	to
start	working	and	reach	peak	effect	in	ten	to	fourteen	days	(maybe	a
little	more	quickly	for	a	transforaminal	approach).	This	means	you	may
not	have	an	accurate	assessment	as	to	how	well	the	injection	worked
until	at	least	two	weeks	have	passed.	You	may	not	notice	improvement
all	at	once,	so	your	physician	may	ask	you	to	keep	a	pain	journal	to
assist	in	gauging	the	injection’s	effects.	Patients	are	often	better	able	to
see	a	progression	of	relief	when	they	keep	a	daily	account	of	their
symptoms.	It	is	important	to	record	not	only	pain	relief	but	also	any
increase	in	activity	or	ability	to	function.	You	may	not	think	you	are
better,	but	then	all	of	a	sudden	you	realize	you	are	able	to	rake	your
yard	for	the	first	time	in	months.	Just	be	aware	that	this	increase	in
activity	may	cause	soreness	in	muscles	you	haven’t	used	in	a	while.
Epidural	steroid	injections	are	typically	performed	in	a	series	of	one	to
three	injections.	If	a	patient	achieves	80%	or	greater	reduction	in	their
symptoms	with	full	return	of	function,	it	is	not	uncommon	to	hold	off	on
further	injections.	If	a	patient	achieves	100%	relief	from	the	first

--- PAGE 70 ---

injection,	there	is	no	indication	for	further	injections	unless	symptoms
recur.	If	an	individual	receives	some	partial	benefit	or	pain	continues	to
restrict	his	or	her	activity	level	despite	a	marked	improvement	in	resting
pain,	a	series	of	injections	may	still	be	indicated.	It	is	not	uncommon	for
patients	to	receive	a	series	of	two	to	three	injections	for	maximal	relief.
These	injections	are	typically	limited	to	three	or	four	in	a	six-month
period	due	to	the	potential	risks	of	repetitive	steroid	exposure	(such	as
adrenal	suppression).	If	the	first	injection	doesn’t	help,	your	physician
may	recommend	a	second	injection	at	a	different	level	or	via	a	different
technique,	or	he	or	she	may	begin	to	look	at	other	structures	as	the
possible	cause	of	your	pain.
It	is	not	uncommon	for	patients	with	complicated	injuries,	especially
those	who	have	undergone	previous	surgery,	to	receive	
intermittent,	as-
needed	epidural	injections	for	long-term	control	of	their	symptoms.	It	is
also	not	uncommon	for	patients	with	chronic	radicular	(nerve	root)	or
lower	extremity	pain	following	surgery	to	be	maintained	on	medications
with	intermittent	injections	used	in	conjunction	to	control	those
symptoms	on	a	long-term	basis.	The	need	for	repeat	injections	isn’t	an
indication	that	the	procedure	failed,	but	rather	that	the	beneficial	effects
of	the	steroid	have	worn	off.	If	the	steroid	effect	is	of	too	short	a
duration,	then	this	won’t	be	a	long-term	solution	for	the	patient;	if
repeated	injections	don’t	provide	relief	for	extended	periods	of	time,
then	there	is	no	indication	for	continued	repeat	injections.	Some	patients
will	come	in	for	an	epidural	every	six	to	twelve	months	and	view	it	as	a
“tune-up.”	They’re	happy	with	how	they	feel	and	function	well	while	the
epidural	is	working,	and	they	come	back	when	the	injection	begins	to
wear	off.	These	people	are	usually	able	to	avoid	using	high-dosage,	long-
term	medications	and	to	avoid	more	invasive	surgery.	Only	your	pain
management	physician	can	provide	a	definitive	answer	as	to	whether	or
not	this	procedure	will	work	for	you,	but	it	is	an	important	option	to
consider.
Questions	to	Ask	Before	Your	Epidural:
1
.	
Will	this	injection	be	performed	under	
fluoroscopic	guidance?
	As
we	stated	earlier	in	the	chapter,	IPM	procedures	involving	the	spine
should	be	done	with	radiologic	guidance	for	safety	and	accuracy.

--- PAGE 71 ---

“Blind”	epidural	injections
	(those	done	without	x-ray	guidance)
have	been	shown	to	be	in	the	wrong	place	more	than	30%	of	the
time,	even	in	experienced	hands.
2
.	
What	approach	or	technique	will	you	use?
3
.	
At	what	level	will	the	procedure	be	performed?
4
.	
Will	you	use	sedation?	Do	I	need	sedation?
5
.	
Are	there	any	restrictions	after	the	procedure?
6
.	
What	complications	can	occur?
Before	the	Procedure:
1
.	
Make	sure	your	doctor	is	aware	of	all	medications	you	are	taking.
Some	heart	medications	are	
blood	thinners
	and	will	increase	the
risk	of	bleeding	complications.	In	order	to	safely	perform	the
epidural,	these	medications	must	be	stopped	for	a	certain	amount	of
time	before	the	procedure	(at	the	discretion	of	the	physician
providing	you	with	those	medications).	You	may	also	need	to	go	for
blood	work	the	morning	of	the	procedure	to	make	sure	your	blood	is
clotting	properly.
2
.	
If	you	are	diabetic,	you	must	tell	your	physician	ahead	of	time.
Insulin
-dependent	diabetics	will	have	to	follow	specific	instructions
before	and	after	the	injection.	If	you	are	having	sedation	during
your	procedure,	you	will	need	to	not	eat	(fast)	before	the	procedure
and	you	should	bring	your	insulin	with	you	to	the	procedure.	You
may	also	have	some	variations	in	your	blood	sugar	levels	for	up	to
two	weeks	from	the	steroids	in	the	injection.	If	you	are	diabetic,	it	is
important	that	you	monitor	your	blood	sugar	more	closely	for	those
two	weeks	after	the	injection	(or	until	your	blood	sugar	is	back
under	control).	If	you	have	a	problem	getting	your	blood	sugar	back
into	a	normal	range,	consult	the	doctor	managing	your	diabetes.

--- PAGE 72 ---

CHAPTER	11
FACET	INJECTIONS:
TREATING	ARTHRITIS
OF	THE	SPINE
W
hen	the	average	person	hears	he	needs	facet	injections,	the	first
question	we	hear	is,	“Where	are	my	
facet	joints
?”	Everyone	is	familiar
with	the	joints	we	can	see,	such	as	the	knees,	hips,	and	elbows,	but
many	people	don’t	know	these	very	important	facet	joints	exist.	Facet
joints	are	paired	structures	located	between	each	of	the	vertebral	bodies
that	act	as	connections	between	each	of	the	spinal	bones.	At	each	spinal
level,	a	disc	separates	the	adjacent	vertebral	bones	in	the	front	of	the
spine;	in	the	back	of	the	spine,	the	vertebral	bones	are	separated	by
these	paired	joints	(
figure	4.5
).
There	are	many	causes	of	axial	or	spinal	pain,	and	one	common	cause
is	the	
degeneration
	and/or	injury	of	the	facet	joints	(also	known	as
zygapophyseal	joints
).	These	joints	can	be	damaged	by	degenerative
wear-and-tear	processes	and/or	traumatic	events,	both	of	which	can
cause	
chronic	pain
	in	the	neck	(cervical),	mid-back	(thoracic),	or	lower
back	(lumbar)	regions.	As	a	disc	degenerates,	it	can	place	additional
pressure	on	these	joints,	causing	pain	in	this	area.	Traumatic	injuries
that	strain,	stretch,	or	tear	the	capsule	of	the	joint	can	also	cause	pain	in
these	areas.
There	are	seven	
cervical	vertebral	bones
,	labeled	C1	to	C7.	There	are
also	12	thoracic	vertebral	bones	labeled	T1	to	T12	and	five	
lumbar
vertebral	bones
	labeled	L1	to	L5	(
figure	4.1
).	The	five	tailbone
vertebrae	are	usually	fused	together,	except	at	the	very	tip,	which	is
called	the	
coccyx
.	At	each	spinal	level,	from	C2–C3	at	the	base	of	the

--- PAGE 73 ---

head	to	L5–S1	at	the	level	of	the	hips,	there	are	paired	facet	joints	on
each	side	of	the	body.	Above	C2–C3	there	are	paired	joints	on	each	side
called	the	
atlanto-axial	(AA)	joints
.	These	
joints	are	located	between
C1	and	C2.	The	
atlanto-occipital	(AO)	joint
	is	located	between	the
occiput
	(base	of	the	skull)	and	C1	(see	
chapter	4
	for	a	more	detailed
description	of	these	structures).	Any	one	of	these	paired	joints	on	either
or	both	sides	can	cause	pain.
Certain	joints	refer	pain,	or	cause	pain	to	be	experienced	in	very
specific	areas,	and	this	is	especially	true	in	the	cervical	region.	These
common	referral	patterns	often	help	physicians	to	determine	which
joints	are	involved	in	a	particular	pain	syndrome.	Injection	or	blockade
of	these	joints	can	result	in	symptomatic	relief.	The	upper	cervical	facet
joints	typically	cause	pain	in	the	neck	associated	with	headaches	and
pain	that	radiates	toward	the	top	of	the	shoulder.	As	we	move	lower	in
the	neck	to	C5–C6	and	C6–C7,	pain	tends	to	radiate	between	the
shoulder	blades	(an	area	referred	to	as	
periscapular
)	and	sometimes
into	the	arms.	The	very	high	cervical	regions,	such	as	the	AO	or	AA
joint,	can	cause	referred	
retro-orbital
	(behind	the	eye)	pain	or	pain	in
the	jaw.	Your	physician	will	try	to	help	determine	which	joints	are
involved	through	your	history	and	physical	examination.	However,	not
all	pain	syndromes	follow	a	perfect	pattern,	and	the	specific	joints
involved	must	be	confirmed	with	
diagnostic	injection(s)
.
Individuals	suffering	from	a	facet-related	problem	will	typically	have
mechanical-type	pain	that	is	worsened	by	specific	motions.	In	the
cervical	region,	pain	typically	increases	when	looking	to	one	side	or	the
other	and/or	looking	up	or	down.	In	the	lower	back,	patients	typically
have	pain	when	arching	their	back	backwards.	In	the	thoracic	area,
where	there	is	much	less	movement,	pain	typically	occurs	with	rotation
(twisting)	motions	or	sometimes	with	coughing	and	sneezing.	During
physical	examination,	feeling	the	joints	
(palpation)
	typically	causes
increased	symptoms	in	the	injured	area.	This	finding	is	often	used	to
identify	which	areas	are	to	be	injected.
Facet	joints	can	be	treated	using	two	basic	techniques.	In	the	first
technique,	
intra-articular	injection
,	a	needle	is	placed	directly	inside
the	joint	(intra-articularly)	to	inject	local	anesthetic	and	steroid.	A
second	technique,	called	a	
medial	branch	block
	or	MBB,	involves
blocking	or	injecting	local	anesthetic	with	or	without	steroid	onto	the

--- PAGE 74 ---

medial	branches,	which	are	tiny	nerves	that	provide	sensation	to	each
facet	joint.	Two	nerves	(medial	branches)	
innervate
	each	facet	joint,
one	from	the	level	above	and	one	from	the	level	below.	For	example,	to
numb	the	C4–C5	facet	joint,	both	the	C4	and	C5	medial	branches	are
injected.	Similarly,	in	the	thoracic	
region,	each	joint	can	be	injected
intra-articularly	by	placing	a	needle	inside	the	joint	(which	is	often	very
difficult	to	accomplish	in	the	thoracic	region)	or	by	blocking	the	medial
branches	of	that	level	and	the	level	above.	The	specific	location	of	the
medial	branch	in	the	thoracic	region	is	highly	variable,	depending	on
whether	it	is	the	high-thoracic,	mid-thoracic,	or	lower-thoracic	region.
Placement	of	the	needles	for	these	medial	branch	blocks	requires	an
intimate	knowledge	of	the	location	of	the	medial	branch	in	a	given
location.	In	the	lumbar	region,	some	patients	will	have	associated
sacroiliac	joint	injuries
	(see	
chapter	12
)	and	may	require	simultaneous
or	combined	treatment	of	the	lower	lumbar	facets	and	sacroiliac	joints	to
achieve	optimal	relief.	When	both	the	facet	joints	and	sacroiliac	joints
are	involved,	this	is	sometimes	referred	to	as	
posterior	joint	syndrome
.
These	injections	provide	both	important	diagnostic	information	and
therapeutic	benefit.	If	the	above	therapeutic	interventions	result	in
symptomatic	relief,	even	if	it	is	only	temporary,	then	the	doctor	can	be
sure	that	your	facet	joints	are	the	cause	of	your	pain.	The	duration	of	the
injections’	effect	will	dictate	your	doctor’s	next	step.	If	prolonged	relief	is
achieved	with	the	injections,	intermittent	steroid	injections	to	the	facet
joints	can	be	performed	on	an	as-needed	basis	up	to	three	to	four	times
per	year	if	necessary.	If	the	patient	is	only	receiving	short-term	relief,
radiofrequency	ablation
	or	
cryoneuroablation
	treatment	to	kill	those
nerves	is	an	alternative	option	(see	
chapter	13
).
After	the	Procedure
Recovery	from	simple	local	injections	and	steroid	injections	to	the	facet
joints	usually	takes	about	one	to	two	days.	Patients	often	experience
almost	immediate	pain	relief	from	the	local	anesthetic,	followed	by
slight	discomfort	from	the	injection,	then	rapid	improvement	in	their
symptoms.	Fortunately,	the	potential	risks	and	complications	from	these
procedures	are	quite	minimal,	primarily	infection	and	bleeding.	There	is
the	small	potential	for	nerve	injury.	However,	the	risks	of	nerve	injury

--- PAGE 75 ---

can	be	dramatically	limited	by	using	appropriate	techniques.
Your	physician	will	want	a	careful	report	from	you	about	any	pain
following	the	procedure,	both	during	what	is	described	as	the	
local
anesthetic	phase
	(the	first	few	hours	when	the	injection	site	is	numb)
and	over	the	next	several	days	to	weeks	as	the	steroids	take	effect.
Depending	on	the	degree	of	benefit	and	duration	of	effect,	
your
physician	will	make	a	decision	about	the	next	appropriate	treatment
step.	Consider	keeping	a	pain	journal,	a	simple	notebook	in	which	you
write	down	how	you	feel	every	day.	Most	of	us	can’t	remember	by
Friday	what	we	wore	to	work	on	Monday,	so	it	is	easier	to	have
something	to	refer	back	to	when	your	doctor	asks	you	two	weeks	after
your	injection	how	well	it	worked.	Consider	scoring	your	pain	on	a	scale
from	zero	to	ten	with	zero	being	no	pain	and	ten	being	the	most	severe
pain	you	can	imagine.	Then	you	can	review	the	numbers	and	see	if	you
gradually	got	better	or	if	you	got	better	right	after	the	procedure	but
rapidly	returned	to	your	baseline	pain	level.	Also	write	down	if	you
notice	any	improvement	in	your	activity	level.	For	example,	before	your
facet	injection	you	may	have	had	difficulty	bending	down	to	put	on	your
socks	in	the	morning.	If	after	the	injection	you	can	perform	this	activity
with	relative	ease,	it	is	important	to	tell	your	doctor	that	information.
Questions	to	Ask	Before	Your	Facet	Block:
1
.	
Will	this	injection	be	performed	under	
fluoroscopic	guidance
?
“Blind”	facet	joint	injections
,	especially	in	the	neck,	can	be
potentially	lethal.	They	are	also	extremely	inaccurate.	Some	people
are	experimenting	with	
ultrasound
	for	facet	joints,	but	the	evidence
of	the	safety	and	efficacy	of	that	technique	is	not	yet	clear.	Most
insurance	companies	agree	that	“blind”	injections	are	ineffective,
and	so	they	will	not	pay	for	them.	For	safety	and	accuracy,	all	spinal
injections	in	IPM	should	be	performed	with	radiologic	guidance.
2
.	
What	approach	or	technique	will	you	use?
3
.	
At	what	level	will	the	procedure	be	performed?
4
.	
Will	you	use	sedation?	Do	I	need	sedation?
5
.	
Are	there	any	restrictions	after	the	procedure?
6
.	
What	complications	can	occur?

--- PAGE 76 ---

Before	the	Procedure:
1
.	
Make	sure	your	doctor	is	aware	of	all	medications	you’re	taking.
Some	heart	medications	are	
blood	thinners
	and	will	increase	the
risk	of	bleeding	complications.	In	order	to	safely	perform	the	facet
block,	these	medications	may	need	to	be	stopped	for	a	certain
amount	of	time	before	the	procedure	(at	the	discretion	of	the
physician	providing	you	with	those	medications).	You	may	
also
need	to	go	for	blood	work	the	morning	of	the	procedure	to	make
sure	your	blood	is	clotting	properly.
2
.	
If	you	are	diabetic,	you	must	tell	your	physician	ahead	of	time.
Insulin
-dependent	diabetics	will	have	to	follow	specific	protocols
before	and	after	the	injection.	If	you	are	having	your	procedure	with
sedation,	you	will	need	to	fast	before	the	procedure	and	you	should
bring	your	insulin	with	you	to	the	procedure.	You	may	also	have
some	variations	in	your	blood	sugar	levels	for	up	to	two	weeks	from
the	steroids	in	the	injection.	If	you	are	diabetic,	it	is	important	that
you	monitor	your	blood	sugar	more	closely	for	two	weeks	after	the
injection	(or	until	your	blood	sugar	is	back	under	control).	If	you
have	a	problem	getting	your	blood	sugar	back	into	a	normal	range,
consult	the	doctor	managing	your	diabetes.

--- PAGE 77 ---

CHAPTER	12
SACROILIAC	INJECTIONS:
ANOTHER	COMMON	CAUSE
OF	BACK	PAIN
T
he	
sacroiliac	joint
	is	the	joint	where	the	pelvis	meets	the	tailbone
(
figure	4.7
).	This	joint	can	be	injured	through	
degeneration
	or	become
painful	following	a	lumbar	fusion,	when	extra	stress	is	placed	on	the
joints	below	the	surgical	level	(i.e.,	an	L5–S1	fusion).	The	sacroiliac	joint
is	also	commonly	injured	in	slip-and-fall	accidents	when	the	patient
lands	on	his	or	her	butt,	or	in	a	motor	vehicle	accident	when	the	injured
party	presses	one	or	both	legs	firmly	against	the	floor	just	prior	to
impact	(
figure	4.8
).	After	such	traumatic	injuries,	the	joint	can	become
unstable	and	slip	in	and	out	of	position.	Finally,	inflammation	called
sacroiliitis
	can	occur	in	association	with	various	rheumatologic
conditions	such	as	
ankylosing	spondylitis,	psoriatic	arthritis
,	and
Reiter’s	syndrome
	(otherwise	known	as	reactive	arthritis).
Physical	therapy	is	the	cornerstone	of	treatment	for	sacroiliac	joint
dysfunction	and	will	typically	include	manipulation	and	mobilization	of
the	joint	as	well	as	stretching	the	surrounding	muscles,	such	as	the
gluteal,	piriformis,	and	quadratus	lumborum	muscles.	Numerous	muscles
attach	in	and	around	the	sacroiliac	joint,	as	well	as	ligamentous
structures	that	can	be	affected	by	injuries	in	this	area	(see	
figures	12.1	a
and	
b
).
If	symptoms	persist	in	the	sacroiliac	region	despite	conservative
measures,	consideration	can	be	given	to	intra-articular	sacroiliac	joint
injections.	In	this	situation,	a	physician	places	a	needle	into	the	joint
under	direct	x-ray	guidance.	Dye	is	injected	to	ensure	the	needle	is

--- PAGE 78 ---

placed	within	the	joint	(
figure	12.2
),	followed	by	an	injection	of	local
anesthetic	and	steroid.	If	this	results	in	symptomatic	
relief,	it	provides
both	therapeutic	and	diagnostic	information.	Your	physician’s	next	step
will	depend	on	the	duration	of	benefit.	If	these	injections	provide	relief
for	a	reasonable	amount	of	time,	they	can	be	repeated	intermittently.	If
they	don’t	provide	prolonged	benefit,	alternative	therapies	may	be
considered.
Radiofrequency	ablation	(RFA)
,	cold	RF	ablation,	or
cryoneuroablation
	of	the	nerves	that	go	to	the	sacroiliac	joints	(the
posterior
	sacral	rami	or	lateral	branches)	can	provide	symptomatic
relief	of	sacroiliac	joint	pain	(see	
chapter	13
).	If	the	sacroiliac	joint	is
unstable,	procedures	that	result	in	long-term	stabilization	of	the	joint
can	be	considered.	Conservative	approaches	include	the	use	of
prolotherapy	in	which	a	deliberately	irritating	medication	or	substance
is	injected	to	stimulate	an	inflammatory	reaction,	which	the	body
responds	to	by	growing	new	tissue	in	the	area	(see	
chapter	15
).	This
serves	to	strengthen	the	
ligament
	and	tendinous	structure	and	thereby
stabilize	the	joint.	In	very	rare	situations,	surgical	sacroiliac	joint	fusions
have	been	performed.	This	is	a	very	aggressive	approach	with	mixed
outcomes	and	should	be	reserved	for	the	most	extreme	cases.

--- PAGE 79 ---

CHAPTER	13
RADIOFREQUENCY
ABLATION	AND	CRYONEUROABLATION:
MAKING	THE
PAIN	STAY	AWAY
R
adiofrequency	ablation	(RFA)
	uses	electrical	energy	to	kill	nerves.
Special	insulated	needles	are	placed	on	the	nerves,	and	the	physician
then	uses	low-level	electrical	stimulation	to	identify	the	location	of	the
target	nerve.	Once	that	nerve	is	identified,	a	small	amount	of	local
anesthetic	is	injected	to	numb	the	area,	and	then	the	nerve	is	heated
with	radiofrequency	energy	to	interrupt	its	ability	to	conduct	the	pain
signal.	Radiofrequency	ablation	treatments	typically	last	six	months	to	a
year,	though	some	patients	experience	relief	for	several	years.	Note	that
RFA	is	reversible	(it	simply	wears	off	when	the	nerve	grows	back)	and
can	be	repeated	when	the	symptoms	recur.	Radiofrequency	ablation	can
be	used	from	the	C2	level	to	the	S1	level	for	
facet	joints
,	and	there	are
several	techniques	now	described	for	the	
sacroiliac	joint
	as	well.
Cryoneuroablation
,	or	nerve	freezing,	is	a	similar	technique	that	uses
cold	instead	of	heat.	Under	local	anesthetic,	a	probe	is	placed	on	top	of
the	nerve	and	localized	with	a	peripheral	nerve	stimulator.	The
temperature	of	the	probe’s	tip	then	drops	to	minus	70°C,	destroying	the
nerve	but	leaving	the	nerve	insulation	intact	so	the	nerve	can	grow	back
along	its	normal	path.	This	outpatient	procedure	can	return	the	nerve	to
its	normal	function	and	give	long-term	relief.	It	is	usually	used	on	larger
nerves;	because	the	cold	will	kill	the	nerve	but	won’t	damage	the
insulation	of	large	nerves,	the	nerves	can	grow	back	along	their	normal

--- PAGE 80 ---

pathways	instead	of	hitting	scar	tissue	that	can	develop	after	surgery,
RFA,	or	chemical	nerve	blocking	with	alcohol	or	
phenol
.	The	probe	is
much	larger,	so	the	area	will	be	sore	for	several	days	after	the	procedure
but	because	
the	nerve	can	grow	back	normally,	a	return	to	normal,	pain-
free	function	is	possible.	Cryoneuroablation,	or	“cryo,”	can	be	repeated	if
symptoms	recur.	Still,	most	doctors	don’t	favor	this	technique,	probably
because	they	have	never	been	trained	in	it.	Also,	no	one	has	shown	one
approach	to	be	superior	to	the	other.	RFA	is	generally	felt	to	last	longer
and	requires	a	much	smaller	needle,	and	cryo	is	not	really	a	viable
option	in	the	cervical	region	because	of	the	size	of	the	probe	that	must
be	used.
Whichever	technique	is	used,	cryo	or	RFA,	the	physician	will	use	low-
level	electrical	stimulation	to	identify	the	location	of	the	target	nerve.
This	means	you	must	be	awake	enough	to	give	the	physician	feedback
about	how	close	the	needle	or	probe	is	to	the	nerve	(sort	of	like	playing
“Marco	Polo”	or	“Hot,	Warm,	Cold”).	Success	with	these	treatments	is
dependent	on	the	patient	providing	accurate	feedback	during	the
procedure.
After	a	nerve-destruction	treatment,	patients	often	experience	some
increased	pain	for	approximately	one	week,	followed	by	slow	and
progressive	improvement	over	a	six-	to	eight-week	period.	Some	patients
feel	a	burning	sensation	described	as	similar	to	sunburn,	associated	with
light	touch	sensitivity	after	the	procedure.	This	typically	resolves	over
four	to	six	weeks,	and	significant	discomfort	can	be	treated	with	creams,
patches,	and/or	pills.	Some	patients	have	residual	muscular	spasm
following	these	treatments.	If	this	occurs,	your	physician	may	suggest
treatment	directed	at	the	muscles	(stretching	and/or	trigger	point
injections,	see	
chapter	7
).

--- PAGE 81 ---

CHAPTER	14
ADHESIOLYSIS:
WASHING	AWAY
THE	SCAR	TISSUE
I
n	
chapter	10
,	we	discussed	epidural	steroid	injections,	which	can	be	a
very	effective	technique	to	treat	
chronic	pain
.	When	epidural	steroids
are	injected,	the	medicine	moves	along	the	path	of	least	resistance;	in
certain	circumstances	this	can	prevent	medicine	from	getting	where	it	is
needed.	After	surgery	it	is	common	for	the	
epidural	space
	to	be	clogged
with	scar	tissue	(adhesions),	which	can	prevent	medicine	from	reaching
the	inflamed	nerve	where	it	is	needed.	This	scar	tissue	can	usually	be
seen	easily	on	MRI	imaging	that	has	been	done	with	gadolinium
(contrast)	enhancement.	Evidence	of	this	is	also	found	during	epidural
injections	when	contrast	flow	is	blocked	to	the	nerve	by	dense
adhesions.
Scar	tissue	that	has	grown	in	the	epidural	space	can	wrap	around	a
nerve	and	cause	chronic	irritation	of	the	nerve	which	the	patient	will
usually	experience	as	chronic	leg	pain	in	the	distribution	of	that	nerve.
You	can	develop	adhesions	in	the	spine	as	a	result	of	surgery,	infection,
chronic	irritation	(such	as	with	stenosis,	a	narrowed	area	in	the	spinal
column),	or	in	reaction	to	the	chemical	irritants	from	a	chronically
leaking	disc
.	Sometimes	these	adhesions	can	be	broken	up	quite	easily,
especially	if	it	is	soon	after	surgery,	but	other	times	the	adhesions	can	be
very	dense	and	thick,	making	them	more	difficult	to	remove.	Breaking
up	or	removing	these	adhesions	is	called	
adhesiolysis
	(
figures	14.1	a
and	
b
).
One	of	the	techniques	to	deliver	medicine	to	the	desired	area	is	to

--- PAGE 82 ---

place	a	
catheter
	inside	the	epidural	space,	steer	it	to	the	intended	target
area,	and	use	fluid	and	medications	to	open	up	the	blocked	areas.	An
interventional	pain	physician,	Gabor	Racz,	
originally	developed	the
technique	and	it	is	sometimes	called	a	“Racz	procedure.”	Because	the
catheter	is	sometimes	difficult	to	steer,	a	steerable	handheld	device	can
be	placed	inside	the	tailbone	and	advanced	to	the	target	area.	On	the
end	of	this	hand	piece	is	a	flexible	catheter	that	can	be	used	to	sweep
back	and	forth	and	mechanically	open	up	adhesions	(“Navicath”).	It	is
also	possible	to	place	a	tiny	fiber	optic	camera	through	a	catheter,	inside
the	spinal	column	(spinal	endoscopy),	which	allows	direct	visualization
of	the	nerves	and	provides	arguably	greater	ability	to	break	up	adhesions
under	direct	vision.	To	date,	no	study	shows	one	of	these	techniques	to
be	more	effective	than	the	other.
A	variety	of	medicines	can	be	injected	in	the	epidural	space.	The	most
common	is	a	time-released	steroid,	a	depo-steroid.	In	the	case	of
adhesiolysis,	your	physician	can	also	inject	a	scar-softening	medicine	as
well	as	a	high	concentration	of	salt	solution	to	shrink	the	nerves	and
potentially	kill	the	tiny	pain	nerves	inside	the	spinal	column.
Although	this	is	a	more	invasive	procedure	than	a	simple	epidural
steroid	injection	and	has	slightly	greater	risks,	it	is	less	invasive	than
open	back	surgery	and	may	be	worth	considering	before	undergoing	a
riskier	open	procedure.	Open	surgical	resection	of	scar	tissue	has	an
extremely	low	long-term	success	rate	(on	the	order	of	5%	to	10%)
because	patients	typically	develop	recurrent	adhesions,	which	are	often
worse	than	the	original	scar	tissue.	With	the	techniques	described	above,
most	studies	suggest	a	success	rate	of	25%	to	50%,	although	several
have	had	even	better	results.	With	this	approach,	scar	tissue	is	less	likely
to	recur	as	compared	to	an	open	surgical	technique;	but	if	it	does,	this
procedure	can	be	repeated.	You	can	always	consider	a	more	aggressive
open	surgery	if	
percutaneous
	adhesiolysis	doesn’t	work,	but	you	may
not	be	able	to	try	this	less	invasive	procedure	if	you	decide	to	start	with
the	more	aggressive	open	surgery.	Adhesiolysis	should	at	least	be
considered	before	implantable	techniques	(e.g.,	spinal	cord	stimulation,
see	
chapter	20
)	as	it	may	prevent	the	need	for	this	more	involved,	risky,
and	expensive	surgery.	Note	that	scar	tissue	that	is	more	than	a	few
years	old	is	usually	very	difficult	to	break	up.	Your	doctors	may	just
move	to	the	next	step	and	elect	to	forgo	adhesiolysis	if	that’s	the	case

--- PAGE 83 ---

due	to	the	low	success	rate	with	that	scenario.	Be	sure	to	discuss	all	your
treatment	options	with	your	physicians	so	you	can	make	an	informed
decision	before	undergoing	this	procedure.
Risks	and	Complications
All	procedures	have	risks;	the	more	aggressive	the	technique,	the	greater
the	risks.	Adhesiolysis	is	more	aggressive	than	regular	epidurals,	and
there	are	greater	risks	involved.	When	trying	to	peel	apart	the	layers	of
adhesions,	it	is	possible	to	tear	one	of	the	layers	lining	the	
spinal	canal
(the	dura).	Spinal	fluid	can	leak	out,	causing	a	spinal	headache.	Local
anesthetic	could	leak	into	the	spinal	fluid	and	cause	very	profound
numbness,	in	other	words	a	very	high	spinal	anesthetic.	Direct
mechanical	trauma	to	the	nerve	roots	can	occur,	and	if	pressure	inside
the	epidural	space	is	too	great,	it	could	decrease	the	blood	flow	to	the
spinal	cord	itself	or	create	increased	spinal	fluid	pressure	all	the	way	up
to	the	brain	and	the	blood	vessels	going	to	the	eyes.	For	this	reason,	it	is
critical	that	you	are	alert	enough	to	tell	your	doctor	if	you	are	having
any	problems	such	as	numbness,	weakness,	headaches,	or	changes	in
vision	during	the	procedure.	As	with	any	procedure,	there	is	a	risk	of
bleeding	or	infection.
Questions	to	Ask	Before	Your	Adhesiolysis:
1
.	
Will	you	use	a	catheter	or	a	camera?
2
.	
Will	I	need	sedation?
3
.	
Did	my	MRI	and/or	my	previous	dye	studies	with	my	earlier
injections	show	a	problem	with	dye	spread	from	scar	tissue?

--- PAGE 84 ---

CHAPTER	15
REGENERATIVE	THERAPY:
REBUILDING	THE	BODY’S
NORMAL	TISSUE
M
ost	of	what	you	have	read	so	far	has	involved	diagnosis	and
management	of	chronic	painful	conditions.	However,	just	like	changing
tires	on	a	car	with	bad	alignment,	this	does	not	treat	the	underlying
issue	(the	bent	frame).	The	car	will	run	better	for	a	while,	but	the
accelerated	wear	and	tear	on	the	tires	will	continue.	Similarly,	when
musculoskeletal	structures	are	unstable	or	out	of	alignment,	they	will
cause	secondary	problems	in	surrounding	structures.	Pain	is	often	caused
by	the	instability	that	occurs	with	
ligament
	or	tendon	laxity,	strain,	or
tearing.	Ligaments	are	fibrous	connective	tissues	that	attach	one	bone	to
another,	and	tendons	are	the	tissues	that	attach	muscles	to	bone.	Loose
ligaments	can	be	associated	with	excessive	motion	and	the	development
of	pain.	Muscles	then	must	overwork	and	subsequently	reside	in	a	state
of	spasm	to	hold	structures	together	and	make	up	for	the	loss	of	normal
tendon	and	ligament	function;	this	leads	to	muscle	pain	and	fatigue.
Once	an	injury	has	occurred,	if	it	is	not	adequately	healed,	the	tissues
holding	structures	together	never	return	to	their	former	strength.	For
example,	a	simple	sprained	ankle	can	be	“weak”	forever	and	prone	to
frequent	re-injury.
Unlike	a	car,	if	we	can	slow	down	the	degenerative	process,	our	self-
healing	system	might	actually	be	able	to	reverse	the	wear	and	tear
process.	When	you	cut	yourself	and	it	gets	red	and	swollen,	this	redness
is	from	increased	blood	flow	and	the	delivery	of	specific	cells	into	the
area	for	repair	of	the	associated	damage.	The	repair	cells,	called

--- PAGE 85 ---

fibroblasts
,	lay	down	new	tissue	to	reinforce	the	torn	or	damaged	tissue.
Inflammation	triggers	this	response,	just	like	
a	piece	of	sand	stimulates
an	oyster	to	lay	down	mother	of	pearl.	Regenerative	therapy	involves	the
injection	of	growth	factors	onto	tendon	and	ligament	attachments	and
stimulates	a	local	inflammatory	reaction	in	the	area	of	injection.	This
stimulates	the	body	to	repair	itself.	Tightening	down	ligaments	and
improving	the	attachment	of	muscles	on	the	bones	restores	the	stability
and	strength	of	the	musculoskeletal	system,	which	hopefully	will
improve	both	function	and	pain,	the	goal	of	all	pain	therapies.	Although
not	covered	by	most	insurance	today,	these	techniques	may	actually	be
the	cure	that	you	have	been	looking	for.
Regenerative	therapy	(originally	called	fibroproliferative	therapy	and
now	called	prolotherapy)	attempts	to	stimulate	the	production	and
activation	of	fibroblasts	at	the	attachment	of	ligaments	and	tendons.	The
goal	is	to	induce	a	natural	healing	process	to	strengthen	these	structures.
The	technique	was	developed	in	the	1930s	as	a	nonsurgical	treatment	for
hernias	and	became	popular	in	the	1950s.	It	became	very	popular	among
general	practitioners,	but	unfortunately,	because	of	their	lack	of	training,
several	patients	were	seriously	injured,	which	gave	the	technique	a	bad
reputation.	The	technique	began	to	flourish	again	in	the	1990s.
Newer	approaches	have	emerged	over	the	last	five	to	ten	years	that
involve	the	injection	of	a	patient’s	own	blood	products	onto	the	tendon
attachment.	Chemicals	released	from	platelets,	tiny	cell	fragments	in	the
blood	that	help	with	clotting,	trigger	fibroblast	proliferation.	The	most
effective	injections	have	the	highest	concentration	of	platelets	and
therefore	the	highest	concentration/amount	of	tissue	growth	factors.	In
this	newer	approach,	blood	is	removed	from	the	patient	and	then	placed
in	a	centrifuge	to	separate	the	plasma	and	various	cells.	The	platelet	rich
plasma	(PRP)	is	then	injected	onto	ligament	and	tendon	attachments.
PRP	is	being	injected	into	knees,	hips,	and	elbows	of	professional
athletes	and	even	injected	into	the	face	by	plastic	surgeons	to	“tighten
up”	the	tissues	like	a	facelift.
Stem	cells
	are	the	ultimate	healing	cells.	You	have	heard	a	great	deal
about	stem	cells	from	embryos,	but	you	also	have	stem	cells	in	your
bone	marrow,	the	blood-cell	factories	inside	your	bones.	These	cells	can
be	sucked	out	of	your	bone	marrow,	cultured,	and	then	re-injected	into
the	injured	structures.	Recently,	stem	cells	were	also	identified	in	the	fat

--- PAGE 86 ---

cells	that	lie	underneath	your	skin,	called	
adipose	tissue
.	One	of	the
newest	regenerative	techniques	involves	sucking	out	fat	cells	from	the
belly,	mixing	them	with	a	chemical	that	
stimulates	the	growth	of	stem
cells,	and	then	injecting	that	solution	onto	the	injured	tissues.	Imagine	a
liposuction	that	would	get	rid	of	your	knee	pain!
Regenerative	therapy	requires	a	comprehensive	look	at	the	injury,
with	a	careful	and	thorough	examination	of	the	surrounding	structures,
to	best	understand	how	the	interactions	of	one	body	part	may	be
affecting	other	adjacent	or	connected	structures.	Factors	that	must	be
considered	for	treatment	of	any	musculoskeletal	injury	include
alignment,	stability,	and	neuromuscular	function.	Understanding	the
proper	musculoskeletal	function	of	the	body	and	how	various	structures
interact	is	essential	to	planning	regenerative	therapy	treatments.

--- PAGE 87 ---

CHAPTER	16
DISCOGRAPHY:
A	BETTER	LOOK	AT
YOUR	DISCS
I
f	your	doctor	is	recommending	a	
discogram
,	you	are	probably	pretty
far	along	in	treatment	and	have	already	tried	a	variety	of	simpler
injections	for	your	pain.	In	fact,	discography	should	rarely,	if	ever,	be
offered	as	the	primary	or	first	intervention.	Discography	is	an	invasive
test	with	a	greater	degree	of	risk	than	many	of	the	other	simple
diagnostic	and	therapeutic	procedures	discussed	earlier.	With	that	said,
for	a	patient	who	needs	a	discogram,	it	can	be	a	valuable	diagnostic	tool.
Discography	is	a	highly	specific	diagnostic	test	that	has	no	therapeutic
value	but	can	provide	useful	information	about	the	anatomy	of	the	disc
and	help	the	physician	to	determine	which	disc	is	the	cause	of	your	pain.
Needles	are	placed	into	multiple	
discs
	within	a	specific	region	of	your
spine	(cervical,	thoracic,	or	lumbar).	The	discs	are	then	injected	with
dye	(contrast)	to	increase	the	pressure	inside	the	disc,	which	distends	the
center	of	the	disc	and	places	pressure	on	its	outer	wall	where	the	nerve
endings	are	located.	Discs	that	significantly	reproduce	the	“usual	pain”
at	low	pressures	are	felt	to	most	closely	correlate	with	those	that	are
causing	pain	on	a	daily	basis.	(Discography	is	more	likely	to	reproduce
back	pain	than	leg	pain.)
Other	useful	information	is	obtained	about	the	disc’s	anatomy	both
from	the	fluoroscopic	images	during	the	actual	discogram	and	from	the
CT	scan
	that	typically	follows.	Discography	always	requires	the	injection
of	more	than	one	disc	because	at	least	one	level	must	serve	as	a	control
level,	that	is,	a	disc	that	should	not	be	painful	during	provocative

--- PAGE 88 ---

testing.	Once	the	needles	are	properly	
positioned,	the	physician	then
injects	the	discs	in	a	random	order	while	asking	the	patient	what	he	or
she	feels	at	each	level	(
figure	16.1
).	The	order	is	random	to	keep	you
from	unconsciously	allowing	the	information	you	have	about	your	injury
to	affect	your	responses.	For	example,	if	every	doctor	you	have	ever	seen
has	told	you	that	you	have	a	herniated	disc	at	L4–L5,	if	the	physician
performing	the	discogram	told	you	that	he	was	injecting	L4–L5	you	may
tense	up	because	you	expect	that	disc	to	hurt,	or	you	may	believe	that
level	will	hurt	more	and	express	discomfort	even	if	the	disc	is	not
actually	painful.	This	doesn’t	mean	that	you’re	crazy	or	that	the	doctor
thinks	you’re	going	to	lie	or	exaggerate.	When	we	expect	something	to
hurt,	we	tense	up	and	anticipate	the	worst.	The	random	testing	order
removes	the	bias	created	by	how	you	think	the	discogram	is	going	to
feel.
Injecting	dye	into	the	disc	distends	the	disc	and	increases	the	pressure,
which	allows	the	physician	to	test	how	each	disc	feels	when	it’s	loaded,
or	pressurized.	A	level	that	reproduces	the	patient’s	pain,	or	at	least	a
component	of	the	patient’s	pain,	is	considered	a	positive	discogram,	or
concordant.
Pain	can	be	caused	by	two	main	issues:	a	tear	in	the	disc	allows	the
fluid	within	the	disc	to	leak	out,	which	irritates	the	nerve	endings	of	the
disc’s	outer	wall;	or	the	disc	has	a	herniation	(like	a	bubble	on	the
sidewall	of	a	tire)	and	the	distension	of	the	disc	from	pressurization
causes	increased	compression	of	the	surrounding	tissue.	When	dye	is
injected	into	the	disc,	the	resulting	pressure	should	reproduce	your	pain
in	a	location	and	pattern	similar	to	your	usual	symptoms;	the	goal	of
discography	is	to	determine	which	discs	reproduce	which	part	of	your
pain.	More	than	one	disc	may	be	positive	on	discography,	which	would
indicate	that	more	than	one	may	be	causing	the	different	components	of
your	pain.	The	degree	or	level	of	pain	that	is	reproduced	is	usually
moderate	to	severe.
By	definition,	discography	is	therefore	a	painful	test,	and	as	we
initially	noted,	it	has	no	beneficial	therapeutic	effects.	In	fact,	patients
often	will	experience	an	increase	in	their	pain	for	about	a	week
following	discography.	However,	the	diagnostic	information	can	be
crucial	to	the	workup	and	treatment	of	back	or	neck	pain.	Because	the
most	important	part	of	this	test	is	determining	what	the	patient	feels

--- PAGE 89 ---

during	the	pressurization	of	the	disc,	the	patient	must	be	alert	and
responsive	to	accurately	report	what	he	or	she	is	feeling	as	the	disc	is
pressurized.	Even	if	sedation	is	utilized	it	will	be	light	so	the	patient	can
provide	accurate	reporting.	Placing	the	needles	
is	usually	accomplished
without	significant	discomfort,	especially	if	the	patient	can	relax	during
needle	insertion.
Risks	and	Complications
Discography	is	not	without	risk.	The	physician	will	be	placing	needles	in
the	vicinity	of	nerves,	so	there	is	a	risk	of	nerve	injury,	although	it’s
small	and	usually	avoidable	with	care	and	attention.	One	of	the	more
concerning	risks	is	that	of	infection.	Because	discs	do	not	have	good
blood	flow,	infection	in	a	disc	can	be	very	difficult	to	treat.	Your
physician	will	likely	give	you	
prophylactic	antibiotics
	through	one	or
two	different	approaches	to	reduce	the	risk	of	infection.
Recently	it	has	been	suggested	that	discography	may	accelerate	disc
degeneration
,	but	this	has	not	been	substantiated	in	large-scale	studies.
Most	physicians	who	perform	discography	do	not	believe	this	to	be	the
case	based	on	many	years	of	experience	and	following	many	patients
who	have	previously	undergone	discography.
Discography	is	an	important	diagnostic	procedure	that	can	help	to
clarify	the	extent	of	damage	and	provide	a	different	view	of	the	inside	of
your	disc	to	show	a	clear	picture	of	the	cause	of	pain.	This	information
assists	physicians	in	making	decisions	about	your	treatment.

--- PAGE 90 ---

CHAPTER	17
MINIMALLY	INVASIVE
DISC	SURGERY:	WHEN
LESS	IS	MORE
M
inimally	invasive	sounds	good,	right?	It	sounds	like	an	easier	surgery,
and	in	many	ways,	it	is.	This	type	of	procedure	is	an	alternative	to	open
back	surgery.	Some	clinicians	look	at	these	less	invasive	and	less
damaging	approaches	as	the	future	of	spine	surgery.	It	is	not	appropriate
for	everyone,	and	the	key	to	a	successful	outcome	lies	in	your	physician
making	sure	you	are	an	appropriate	candidate.
Minimally	invasive	disc	surgery	represents	a	combination	of	various
therapies	designed	to	treat	injured	and/or	damaged	
discs
	within	the
spine.	These	are	most	commonly	performed	for	lumbar	(lower	back)
injuries;	however,	some	physicians	also	perform	these	treatments	in	the
cervical	(neck)	and	thoracic	(mid-back)	areas.	In	general,	these
procedures	treat	one	of	two	different	types	of	disc	pathologies	or
injuries.	The	most	common	injury	treated	with	this	procedure	is	a	
disc
herniation
	or	
disc	bulge
.	In	this	situation,	the	disc	protrudes	or	sticks
out	beyond	the	confines	of	the	normal	disc,	like	a	bubble	in	the	sidewall
of	a	tire	(
figures	5.2	a
	and	
b
).	If	it	is	in	the	right	(or	wrong)	place,	the
disc	herniation	can	compress	and	irritate	a	nerve	within	the	spine	(
figure
4.2
).	Once	the	herniation	is	removed,	the	cause	of	the	irritation	goes
away,	and	the	pain	goes	with	it.	So	how	do	we	get	rid	of	the	herniation?
There	are	many	types	of	
percutaneous	disc	decompression
surgeries;	some	work	by	removing	material	inside	the	disc	(intradiscal
approach),	but	this	technique	can	only	be	used	with	a	
contained
herniation
.	Other	percutaneous	techniques	work	on	the	outside	of	the

--- PAGE 91 ---

disc	(extradiscal	approach)	and	may	be	appropriate	for	
more	complex
disc	extrusions.	Intradiscal	decompression	decreases	the	pressure	inside
the	disc	and	provides	room	for	the	herniation	to	move	back	into	the	disc
space.	This	procedure	is	performed	percutaneously	(through	the	skin)
and	involves	the	removal	of	disc	material	through	a	needle,	or	
cannula
.
A	variety	of	techniques	and	approaches	are	available.	The	majority	of
these	therapies	remove	disc	material	from	the	
nucleus
,	or	center,	of	the
disc.	Today	there	are	many	new	procedures	(and	more	being	developed)
to	remove	disc	material	percutaneously	from	within	the	
spinal	canal
and	
neural	foramen
	(the	hole	where	the	nerve	exits).
All	
intradiscal	techniques
	(surgery	that	occurs	inside	the	disc)
remove	material	from	the	center	of	the	disc	(the	
nucleus	pulposus
).
When	your	doctor	chooses	this	approach,	he	or	she	may	mechanically
cut	out	material	with	a	variety	of	devices	or	simply	vaporize	the	tissue,
which	turns	it	into	gas	that	can	leak	out	through	the	needle.	Your	doctor
will	review	your	films	to	determine	where	your	herniation	is	located	on
the	disc	and	in	the	canal,	its	shape,	and	the	size	of	your	disc	(its	height
from	top	to	bottom).	Then	he	or	she	will	assess	any	surrounding
degeneration
	and	damage	before	deciding	if	percutaneous	removal	is
appropriate	and	which	technique	is	most	likely	to	help	you.	This
requires	that	your	physician	have	experience	in	reading	MRIs,
discograms
,	and	
CT	scans
.	The	technique	your	doctor	chooses	will
depend	on	what	your	herniation	looks	like	and	what	he	or	she	is	most
comfortable	with	as	an	operator.
Intradiscal	percutaneous	discectomy	approaches	include
Nucleoplasty
®
	(
figure	17.1	c
),	Disc	Dekompressor
®
	(
figure	17.1	f
),
LASE
	(laser	assisted	spinal	endoscopy,	
figure	17.1	e
),	
Nucleotome
®
(
figure	17.1	a
),	
percutaneous	endoscopic	discectomies
,	and	several
other	approaches.	The	different	therapies	each	work	via	a	different
mechanism	to	remove	disc	material.	These	procedures	only	work	for
“contained”	herniations.	This	means	the	herniation	must	be	attached	to
the	disc,	not	a	free	fragment,	and	that	it	must	be	contained	by	the	back
wall	of	the	disc	(the	
annulus
,	see	
chapter	4
)	and	not	ruptured	through
that	outer	wall.	The	herniation	also	must	be	of	a	specific	size	and	shape
for	these	approaches	to	be	successful.	Discs	that	have	collapsed	beyond
50%	of	their	normal	height,	or	those	with	a	significantly	
extruded
herniation
,	typically	can’t	be	treated	via	percutaneous	intradiscal

--- PAGE 92 ---

approaches.	(However	percutaneous	extradiscal	approaches	may	be
appropriate	for	large	disc	extrusions).
Disc	tears
	are	also	commonly	treated	percutaneously.	In	this
situation,	the	disc	has	a	crack	or	tear	in	its	outer	wall.	The	body	reacts	to
this	injury	by	growing	small	blood	vessels	into	the	area.	Unfortunately,
with	these	blood	vessels	grow	small	nerve	endings.	The	center	of	the	disc
contains	chemical	irritants	that	can	leak	out	through	a	tear	and	irritate
the	small	nerve	endings.	This	causes	what	is	referred	to	as	
discogenic
pain:
	the	disc	itself	hurts.	Good	candidates	for	repairing	discs	with	tears
will	have	otherwise	relatively	healthy	discs	(i.e.,	the	discs	must	still	have
at	least	half	their	original	height	from	top	to	bottom).	Patients	with	discs
that	have	significant	associated	end-plate	damage,	bony	instability
(
spondylolisthesis
,	where	one	bone	slips	out	of	position	in	relation	to
the	bone	above	or	below),	and/or	the	presence	of	a	significant
compressive	disc	herniation	would	not	be	good	candidates	for	this
procedure.	Some	physicians	combine	percutaneous	decompression	of	the
disc	with	repair	of	the	annulus	to	treat	both	components	of	the	damage.
Repair	of	the	disc’s	outer	wall	can	be	accomplished	with	a	therapy
called	IDET
®
	
(intradiscal	electrothermal	annuloplasty)
.	In	this
procedure,	a	coil	is	threaded	around	the	inside	of	the	the	annulus	(
figure
17.1	d
).	Once	positioned,	the	coil	is	heated	using	radiofrequency	energy,
which	serves	two	theoretical	purposes;	to	repair	the	tear	in	the	outer
wall	of	the	disc	and	to	denervate	the	disc	so	that	it	can	no	longer	be
painful	(similar	to	an	RF	for	
facet	joints
).	It	is	likely	that	repair	of	that
outer	wall	of	the	disc	occurs	through	the	creation	of	organized	scar
tissue,	similar	to	regenerative	therapy,	in	reaction	to	the	heat	injury.	A
newer	approach	called	
Biacuplasty
®
	(
figure	17.1	g
)	is	emerging,	and	it
is	unclear	at	this	time	whether	it	will	be	more	or	less	effective	than
IDET
®
.	Several	other	approaches	are	on	the	horizon	for	repairing
annular	damage,	but	these	have	not	been	fully	studied	at	the	time	of	this
first	edition.	We	hope	in	later	editions	to	provide	you	with	more
information	on	these	emerging	technologies.
The	major	advantage	of	these	therapies	for	the	patient	is	that,	since
they	are	less	invasive,	they	cause	less	tissue	damage	to	other	adjacent
structures	such	as	bone	and	muscle,	which	should	equate	to	a	quicker
recovery	and	reduced	risk.	Perhaps	their	biggest	advantage	is	that	they
can	help	the	patient	avoid	more	aggressive	and	risky	surgery.	Open

--- PAGE 93 ---

surgical	disc	decompression	and	treatment	typically	involves	removal	of
some	of	the	
ligament
	and	bony	structures	of	the	spine.	Unfortunately,
this	can	lead	to	later	destabilization	of	that	spinal	segment.	Instability
can	cause	increased	and	abnormal	motion	of	that	spinal	segment	and
usually	is	associated	with	pain.	
If	the	back	pain	is	severe	enough,	some
patients	undergo	spinal	fusion	surgery	to	prevent	that	movement.	Fusion
surgeries	are	unfortunately	associated	with	less	predictable	outcomes
and	have	a	significant	chance	of	making	things	worse	(some	estimate
this	at	10-20%).	Avoiding	the	risk	of	spinal	destabilization	reduces	the
risk	of	a	more	aggressive	surgery.	When	it	comes	to	back	problems,	less
is	often	more.	Most	pain	physicians	view	open	spinal	surgery	as	a
necessary	evil:	sometimes	it’s	needed,	but	it	should	be	avoided	whenever
possible.	We	know	several	spine	surgeons	who	have	refused	fusion
surgery	for	themselves	because	of	its	risks,	preferring	to	find	other	ways
to	manage	their	problem.
Other	minimally	invasive	techniques	have	recently	been	developed	for
the	removal	of	overgrown	ligaments	in	the	back	of	the	spine.	As	we	age,
the	joints	and	ligaments	of	the	spine	grow	in	response	to	the	stresses	of
normal	life	activities.	When	these	grow	too	much,	it	can	cause	a
condition	called	
spinal	stenosis
	(as	was	discussed	in	
chapter	4
)	with
associated	nerve	compression.	For	patients	who	do	not	respond	on	a
sustained	basis	to	epidural	injections	and	where	the	stenosis	is	primarily
related	to	
ligament	flavum
	overgrowth,	percutaneous	removal	is	now
an	alternative	to	open	surgery.	The	procedure,	called	minimally	invasive
lumbar	decompression	(MILD),	is	still	new,	but	early	studies	look
promising.
The	minimally	invasive	techniques	discussed	in	this	chapter	are
indicated	for	both	young	and	old	patients,	as	long	as	the	individual
patient’s	spinal	anatomy	is	appropriate	for	the	planned	approach.	If
there’s	a	chance	that	a	percutaneous	procedure	will	help	you,	it’s
probably	worth	giving	it	a	try,	since	percutaneous	procedures	don’t	burn
bridges.	You	can	always	have	open	back	surgery	if	the	percutaneous
procedure	doesn’t	work,	but	you	can’t	go	back	and	try	the	percutaneous
procedure	if	the	open	procedure	doesn’t	work.	Putting	off	that	first	open
surgery	as	long	as	possible	prevents	or	at	least	delays	the	need	for	a
fusion.	Since	a	fusion	at	one	level	can	put	pressure	on	adjacent	disc
levels,	this	can	also	delay	the	progression	of	disc	disease	at	other	levels.

--- PAGE 94 ---

By	preventing	the	first	operation,	you	may	prevent	or	at	least	delay	the
need	for	multiple	operations	later,	especially	for	someone	with
multilevel	disc	disease.	Unfortunately,	many	insurance	carriers,
including	Medicare,	do	not	approve	of	these	newer	and	less	invasive
therapies.
Side	Effects	and	Complications
The	most	common	complications	with	this	type	of	surgery	include
discitis
	(infection	of	the	disc),	nerve	injury,	and/or	bleeding.	The
incidence	of	these	complications	is	very	low	(less	than	2%).	To	limit
your	risk,	you	should	expect	certain	things	from	your	physician.	Any
work	performed	on	a	disc	should	be	performed	in	a	completely	sterile
environment.	Intravenous	antibiotics,	sterile	prepping,	and	sterile
technique	are	mandatory	for	the	safe	performance	of	these	treatments.
Because	these	surgeries	are	uncomfortable,	sedation	is	usually	provided.
If	symptoms	persist	after	minimally	invasive	disc	surgery,	your
physician	may	recommend	further	epidural	and/or	facet	injections	if
there	is	residual	inflammation	around	the	nerve	roots	in	the	
epidural
space
	or	a	secondary	problem	with	the	facet	joints.	This	doesn’t
necessarily	mean	that	the	minimally	invasive	disc	surgery	was
unsuccessful;	it	indicates	that	other	pathology	is	present	that	requires
additional	treatment.	Most	minimally	invasive	disc	surgery	is	performed
intradiscally	(inside	the	disc),	so	it	doesn’t	change	pre-existing	nerve
inflammation	inside	the	spinal	canal,	a	condition	that	may	require
epidural	steroid	injection	or	adhesiolysis	therapy	(see	
chapters	10
	and
14
).	Some	patients	will	have	residual	back	pain	that	requires	treatment
related	to	the	arthritic	component	(facet-related	symptoms)	of	their
spinal	degeneration.
After	the	Procedure
Following	minimally	invasive	disc	surgery,	patients	should	expect	a
period	of	recovery.	Be	realistic;	although	this	is	a	less	invasive
procedure,	someone	is	still	operating	on	your	disc.	Your	body	needs	time
to	recover.	You’re	not	going	to	wake	up	the	next	morning	and	be	able	to

--- PAGE 95 ---

move	boulders.	You	should	expect	a	period	of	increased	symptoms	for
approximately	one	week	for	each	level	that	is	treated;	for	example,	a
patient	with	two-level	surgery	should	expect	some	increased	pain	and
soreness	for	about	a	two-week	period.	The	symptoms	in	the	legs	or	arms
will	typically	improve	over	about	a	one-month	period,	and	pain	in	the
lower	back	will	typically	improve	over	a	two-	to	four-month	period.
Between	four	to	eight	weeks	after	surgery,	your	physician	will	likely
recommend	a	course	of	physical	therapy	including	a	spinal	stabilization
program,	which	works	by	strengthening	the	core	musculature.	It’s
essential	that	you	cooperate	with	this	program	and	commit	to	an
exercise	regimen	that	will	
improve	your	spinal	stability	for	the	long-term
health	of	your	spine.	Odds	are	if	you	made	it	to	this	point,	your	back	has
been	hurting	for	a	while.	This	means	you	have	limited	your	activity
level.	The	muscles	you	once	used	all	the	time	have	become
deconditioned	and	need	to	be	strengthened.	
Spinal	decompression
therapy	may	also	aid	in	healing	and	remodeling	of	the	disc	as	it	heals.
Questions	to	Ask	Your	Doctor:
1
.	
How	many	levels	will	you	address	with	minimally	invasive	surgery?
2
.	
How	long	will	I	be	out	of	work?	(This	will	depend	on	what	type	of
work	you	do.)
3
.	
Which	techniques	will	you	use?
4
.	
How	many	of	these	procedures	have	you	performed?
5
.	
What	is	your	success	rate?
6
.	
What	complications	have	you	seen?
7
.	
What	are	my	other	options?	If	you	want	to	know	about	the
conventional	surgical	options,	then	ask	to	be	referred	for	a
consultation	with	a	qualified	surgeon.
Before	the	Surgery:
1
.	
Provide	your	physician	with	copies	of	your	latest	MRI	or	CT	scans.
2
.	
You	physician	may	request	that	you	wear	a	back	brace	for	a	period
of	time	after	your	surgery.	It	is	best	to	obtain	this	in	advance	and
bring	it	with	you	to	the	procedure.

--- PAGE 96 ---

CHAPTER	18
COMPLEX	REGIONAL
PAIN	SYNDROME:
ONE	SMALL	NERVE
CAUSING	BIG	PROBLEMS
C
omplex	regional	pain	syndrome	(CRPS)
	is	a	
chronic	pain
	problem
that	most	people	don’t	even	know	about	unless	they	or	a	friend	or	family
member	has	it.	CRPS	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	and	painful	chronic	pain
conditions	to	treat	and	is	associated	with	severe	burning	pain	and
hypersensitivity	to	touch.	This	condition	usually	follows	a	nerve	injury;
your	doctor	will	try	to	identify	the	specific	injury	because	it	may	hold
the	key	to	successful	treatment.	The	causes	of	CRPS	are	beyond	the
scope	of	this	book	and	are	actively	debated	within	the	medical
community.
Patients	with	CRPS	frequently	describe	burning,	stabbing	pain	that	is
associated	with	sensitivity	to	touch.	It	can	be	difficult	to	understand	the
needs	of	a	person	suffering	from	CRPS.	They	often	seem	anxious	and	are
frequently	scared	that	someone	or	something	will	touch	the	affected
area.	Consider	your	hand	for	a	moment.	Right	now	you	are	holding	a
book	and	touching	the	page.	But	think	about	all	the	things	that	touch
your	hand	that	you	have	minimal	control	over.	When	you	take	a	shower,
the	water	hits	your	skin;	when	you	sleep,	your	hand	touches	the	sheets;
and	in	the	winter,	you	wear	gloves.	Imagine	being	unable	to	tolerate	any
of	those	things	because	the	least	amount	of	pressure	causes	extreme
pain.
In	addition	to	pain,	patients	frequently	describe	color	changes	in	the

--- PAGE 97 ---

extremity,	describing	it	turning	blue	and	cold	or	red	and	hot,	along	with
swelling	and	sensitivity	(
figure	18.1
).	These	are	called	
vasomotor
changes
	and	are	evidence	of	the	misfiring	of	nerves	(sympathetic	nerve
dysfunction).	
Sympathetic	nerves
	are	a	component	of	the	autonomic
nervous	system,	which	automatically	
and	without	your	conscious
participation	controls	many	different	functions	within	the	body.	This
includes	sweating,	hair	erection,	pupil	size,	heart	rate,	bowel	function,
and	many	other	important	bodily	functions	that	are	done	without
conscious	control.	These	nerves	are	supposed	to	turn	on	if	you’re	injured,
but	in	people	with	CRPS,	they	never	turn	off	again.	If	you	stick	your
hand	in	a	fire,	the	nerves	in	your	hand	produce	a	burning	sensation	so
you	know	to	pull	your	hand	out	of	the	fire	before	you	seriously	damage
it.	Once	you	pull	your	hand	out	of	the	fire,	that	sensation	should	go
away.	Someone	with	CRPS	experiences	that	moment	of	pain	but	the	pain
signal	never	turns	off,	or	it	becomes	so	sensitive	that	the	least	amount	of
stimulation	feels	like	the	hand	is	back	in	the	fire.
Treatment	for	Complex	Regional	Pain	Syndrome
The	cornerstone	of	CRPS	treatment	includes	exercise,	physical	therapy,
and	increased	use	of	the	involved	area,	even	though	that’s	very	painful.
Treatment	of	the	injured	peripheral	nerve	that	caused	the	CRPS,	when	it
can	be	identified,	can	be	highly	effective.	
Anti-seizure
	medicines	seem
to	help	because	these	medications	stabilize	nerves	and	prevent	excessive
firing,	similar	to	how	they	treat	seizures.	Seizure	medications	stabilize
the	nerve	membranes	and	decrease	their	firing	rate;	calming	the	nerve
firing	decreases	pain	and	the	nerves	become	less	sensitive.
Antidepressants
	and	a	variety	of	other	medications	can	also	be	very
helpful	to	control	the	pain.
When	symptoms	persist	beyond	these	conservative	measures,	early
intervention	with	injections	that	temporarily	shut	down	the	sympathetic
nerves	can	be	effective	for	this	pain	syndrome,	sort	of	like	rebooting	a
computer.	The	literature	clearly	supports	that	the	earlier	these
interventions	are	performed,	the	more	likely	they	are	to	be	successful.
The	physician	must	diagnose	this	condition	as	early	as	possible.
Unfortunately,	in	some	patients	all	of	these	measures	fail,	and	those
patients	may	ultimately	need	to	undergo	more	aggressive	treatment	in

--- PAGE 98 ---

the	form	of	implantable	therapies	(see	
chapter	20
).	Spinal	cord
stimulation	is	most	commonly	used,	which	replaces	the	pain	signal	with
a	soothing	tingling	sensation.	This	therapy	is	best	described	as	a
distraction	therapy:	nerves	can	only	carry	one	signal	at	a	time,	so	the
tingling	sensation	produced	by	spinal	cord	stimulation	prevents	the	pain
signal	from	getting	through	to	the	brain.	As	a	last	resort,	consideration
could	be	given	to	an	implanted	drug	delivery	system.	Both	of	these
modalities	should	be	preceded	by	a	trial	of	that	type	of	interventional
therapy,	described	in	more	detail	in	
chapter	20
.
Sympathetic	Blocks
There	are	three	types	of	nerves:	feeling	(sensory)	nerves,	muscle	(motor)
nerves,	and	sympathetic	nerves.	Unlike	the	motor	and	sensory	nerves
that	travel	along	very	specific	routes,	the	sympathetic	nerves	travel	as	a
net	all	over	the	body,	and	they	gather	together	in	several	places	called
ganglia:
	the	neck,	the	belly,	the	lower	back,	and	at	the	tip	of	the
tailbone.	Placing	local	anesthetic	on	one	of	those	gathering	spots,	or
ganglion,	is	called	a	sympathetic	ganglion	block	and	is	most	commonly
used	for	the	treatment	of	CRPS	conditions.	Intermittent	injections	are
typically	used,	but	a	pain	physician	can	alternatively	create	a	continuous
sympathetic	blockade	using	an	epidural	
catheter
	or	by	placing	a
catheter	along	the	indicated	sympathetic	nerves.	The	pain	physician	can
attempt	to	aggressively	treat	CRPS	by	using	either	intermittent	daily
injections	or	a	continuous	infusion	for	a	period	between	one	week	and
three	months	(depending	on	the	clinical	situation	and	the	response	to
therapy).	Note	that	not	all	cases	of	CRPS	are	sympathetically	mediated
and	therefore	some	forms	of	CRPS	(“non-sympathetically	mediated”)
cannot	be	controlled	with	sympathetic	blocks.
In	the	cervical	region,	sympathetic	blocks	are	typically	performed	at
the	
stellate	ganglion
,	which	is	a	collection	of	nerves	in	the	sympathetic
chain	that	sit	in	the	front	of	the	neck	at	approximately	C7	to	T1.	The
cervical	sympathetic	chain	can	actually	be	injected	in	a	number	of
locations	along	the	sympathetic	chain,	but	physicians	typically	do	this	at
C6	or	C7.	Some	physicians	will	block	these	nerves	at	T2	or	T3.	The
thoracic	levels	require	an	approach	from	the	back.
Stellate	ganglion	blocks	were	performed	for	years	without

--- PAGE 99 ---

fluoroscopic	guidance
	by	feeling	for	a	specific	bony	bump	in	the	front
of	the	cervical	region.	Today,	these	injections	are	typically	performed
with	fluoroscopic	guidance	for	accuracy	and	safety.	The	thoracic
approaches	require	a	much	greater	degree	of	caution	due	to	the	potential
risk	of	a	
pneumothorax
	(collapsed	lung).	Although	this	risk	also	exists
for	the	cervical	or	neck	approaches,	it	is	a	much	lower	risk	than	it	is
with	a	thoracic	approach.	Certain	precautions	must	also	take	place	for
any	patient	undergoing	a	stellate	ganglion	block	because	local	anesthetic
can	spill	on	to	the	phrenic	nerve	that	
innervates
	the	
diaphragm
,	an
important	muscle	for	breathing.	Because	of	this,	stellate	ganglion	blocks
should	never	be	performed	on	both	sides	at	the	same	time.	The	physician
must	take	this	risk	into	account	before	performing	this	injection	for	a
patient	with	pulmonary	compromise	(i.e.,	severe	lung	disease)	or	other
associated	
breathing	problems,	and	it	may	be	too	dangerous	for	some
patients.
In	the	lumbar	region,	the	sympathetic	chain	lies	along	the
anterolateral	border	(front	side)	of	the	spine	and	extends	predominantly
from	L2	to	L4.	These	nerves	are	approached	by	placing	needles	from	the
back	side	of	the	spine	toward	the	front	surface	of	the	spine.
Celiac	plexus
	and	other	abdominal	sympathetic	blocks	are	typically
used	for	cancer	pain	management	but	have	been	used	by	some
physicians	for	the	treatment	of	chronic	
pancreatitis
	and	other
abdominal	conditions.	This	collection	of	sympathetic	nerves	lies	in	front
of	the	
aorta
	(the	biggest	blood	vessel	in	the	abdominal	region).
Approach	of	this	ganglion	requires	specific	training	for	this	procedure
and	a	full	awareness	of	the	potential	risks	and	complications.	With	that
said,	this	is	a	relatively	safe	procedure	that	has	a	very	high	success	rate
for	the	treatment	of	abdominal	pain	from	certain	conditions	such	as
pancreatic	cancer.	In	fact,	it	is	the	first-line	treatment	for	patients	with
abdominal	pain	from	pancreatic	cancer	who	don’t	respond	to	oral
medications.
Pelvic	pain	conditions	including	
interstitial	cystitis
,	chronic	pelvic
pain,	
radiation	neuritis
,	and	other	pelvic	injuries	can	sometimes	be
treated	with	superior	and	inferior	
hypogastric	plexus
	blocks.	This	set	of
sympathetic	nerves	lies	in	front	of	the	L5–S1	juncture	and	again	requires
specific	training	and	expertise	in	order	to	place	a	needle	safely	in	this
region.	A	collection	of	sympathetic	nerves	at	the	very	tip	of	the	spine	in

--- PAGE 100 ---

front	of	the	tailbone	region	(called	the	
ganglion	impar
)	can	be	blocked
for	the	treatment	of	certain	types	of	rectal	pain,	most	typically	stemming
from	cancer	or	its	associated	treatments.
In	addition	to	blocking	sympathetic	nerves	directly	at	the	sympathetic
ganglion,	these	nerves	can	also	be	more	centrally	blocked	in	the	
spinal
canal
	by	performing	an	epidural.	In	fact,	multiday	sympathetic	blocks
can	be	achieved	by	placement	of	catheters	in	the	
epidural	space
	and
then	re-injecting	these	on	a	daily	basis;	this	can	also	be	performed	by
placing	catheters	along	the	sympathetic	chains,	although	epidural
catheters	seem	to	be	more	stable	in	their	position	in	most	patients.	In
some	patients	with	particularly	severe	pain,	a	continuous	epidural
infusion	can	be	used	for	one	week	up	to	three	or	four	months	for
treatment	of	severe	complex	regional	pain	syndrome.	During	that	period
of	continuous	sympathetic	blockade,	the	patient	should	also	undergo
aggressive	physical	therapy	treatment	to	improve	function	and	range	of
motion.	Sympathetic	discharge	
causes	blood	vessels	to	constrict,	think	of
it	as	a	way	of	the	body	self-preserving	and	protecting	an	injured	area.	If
that	area	is	bleeding	out,	constriction	of	the	vessels	will	limit	the	extent
of	blood	loss.	Sympathetic	discharge	causes	redirection	of	blood	to	vital
organs	to	protect	the	body.	So	with	a	sympathetic	discharge	the	patient’s
affected	area	will	often	turn	pale,	due	to	constriction	of	the	blood	vessels
to	that	area.	When	you	block	the	sympathetic	nerves,	the	area	receives
increased	blood	flow	and	turns	red.	This	can	lead	to	a	decrease	in	blood
pressure	as	the	body	redirects	the	blood	volume	to	a	larger	area.	When
blood	is	distributed	to	more	areas,	there	is	less	in	the	major	blood	vessels
(we	all	have	a	fixed	amount	of	blood	in	our	systems)	and	can	lead	to	a
drop	in	blood	pressure.

--- PAGE 101 ---

CHAPTER	19
POST-HERPETIC	NEURALGIA	(PHN):	EARLY
TREATMENT	IS	THE	KEY	TO	SUCCESS
C
hickenpox	(herpes	varicella)	is	an	extremely	common	childhood
disease.	Many	of	us	remember	the	painful	itchy	sores	that	guaranteed	us
a	week	out	of	school	while	we	soaked	in	oatmeal	baths	and	tried	not	to
scratch.	Not	as	many	people	are	familiar	with	the	disease’s	adult
counterpart,	shingles	(herpes	zoster),	until	they	have	experienced	this
painful	disease.	It	is	estimated	that	one	in	ten	individuals	who	have	had
chickenpox	will	develop	shingles	and	this	disease	strikes	200,000	to
800,000	patients	in	the	United	States	each	year.	Shingles	is	most
commonly	seen	in	the	elderly	population	and	people	who	are
immunosuppressed.
Shingles	can	begin	in	the	way	that	you	normally	feel	when	you
contract	the	flu,	except	this	virus	is	followed	by	a	painful	rash.	Initially
people	often	report	feeling	run	down	or	as	if	they	are	coming	down	with
something	a	few	days	before	the	blistering	rash	appears.	Many	people
experience	pain,	itching,	tingling,	fever,	fatigue,	and/or	muscle	pain
prior	to	developing	the	rash.	Unlike	the	chicken	pox	where	the	rash
appears	all	over	the	body,	the	shingles	rash	generally	appears	on	only
one	side	and	in	one	dermatome	(i.e.	in	the	distribution	of	a	specific
nerve;	on	the	chest	this	appears	as	a	horizontal	strip).	The	rash	usually
begins	as	an	area	of	redness	and	then	blisters	develop	(
figure	19.1
).
Towards	the	end	of	the	second	week	the	blisters	begin	to	crust	over	and
dry	up.	The	crust	usually	falls	off	by	the	third	to	fifth	week	leaving
behind	pink	scars	that	can	become	numb	and	light	colored.	The	most
common	areas	for	shingles	to	appear	on	the	body	are	the	thoracic	area

--- PAGE 102 ---

(around	your	mid-section,	belt	line,	bra	line,	etc.)	or	in	the	trigeminal
nerve	area	
(face	and	head).	Shingles	can	also	appear	in	the	lumbar	area
(low	back)	and	sacral	area	(tailbone),	but	this	is	rarer.
After	experiencing	an	episode	of	chicken	pox,	the	virus	that	caused	the
infection	settles	down	to	live	in	your	nerve	cells	for	the	rest	of	your	life.
These	virus	particles	lie	dormant	inside	the	cell	body,	near	the	spine,
until	one	day	when	the	virus	decides	to	reactivate.	This	seems	to	occur
at	times	when	the	immune	system	is	not	working	its	best,	such	as	during
stress	(why	Mom	told	you	to	take	care	of	yourself,	stress	and	fatigue	can
make	you	more	prone	to	infection),	older	age,	or	in	those	with	disease-
induced	immunocompromise,	such	as	someone	with	cancer	or	HIV.
Inside	the	body,	the	shingles	virus	spreads	when	active	virus	particles
travel	down	the	course	of	an	involved	nerve	root.	The	blisters,	or
vesicles,	form	at	the	very	end	of	the	nerve,	where	they	terminate	at	the
level	of	the	skin;	these	blisters	contain	active	(live)	viral	particles.	It’s
the	presence	of	the	viral	particles	in	the	blisters	that	makes	this	disease
contagious	at	this	point	in	time.	Patients	with	oozing	blisters	must	be
very	careful	to	avoid	contact	with	pregnant	women	and	anyone	who	has
not	had	the	chicken	pox.	The	chicken	pox	virus	can	be	extremely
dangerous	to	adults	and	the	unborn	child.
Post	herpetic	neuralgia	(PHN)	refers	to	the	nerve	damage	that	can
linger	long	after	the	shingles	virus	has	cleared.	When	the	virus	travels
down	the	nerve	it	causes	inflammation	and	hence	
edema
	formation
(swelling)	of	the	nerve.	This	swelling	can	compromise	the	blood	supply
to	the	nerve,	which	can	lead	to	the	death	of	parts	of	the	nerve.	If	you
were	to	look	at	a	cross	section	of	a	nerve	affected	by	PHN	under	a
microscope	you	would	see	that	there	was	a	loss	of	the	larger	nerves.
These	larger	diameter	fibers	are	the	part	of	the	nerve	responsible	for
normal	sensory	function,	the	small	diameter	neurons	that	remain	are	the
nerves	responsible	for	transmitting	pain	sensation.	Large	diameter
neurons	have	an	inhibitory	influence	on	the	small	diameter	pain-
transmitting	neurons.	The	loss	of	this	sensory	input	from	the	large
diameter	neurons	at	the	level	of	the	
central	nervous	system
	causes
PHN.
The	good	news	for	most	shingles	patients	is	that	only	20-30%	of
people	who	get	shingles	develop	post	herpetic	neuralgia.	The	risk	for
developing	post	herpetic	neuralgia	increases	with	age.	While	it	is	almost

--- PAGE 103 ---

unheard	of	for	a	20-year-old	patient	with	shingles	to	develop	post
herpetic	neuralgia,	somewhere	around	50-75%	of	patients	over	the	age
of	70	who	have	shingles	will	go	on	to	develop	PHN.	This	dramatic
increase	occurs	because	older	patients	are	more	
likely	to	have	pre-
existing	vascular	disease,	which	would	exacerbate	the	effect	of	the
compromised	blood	supply	to	the	affected	nerve	(similarly,	I	have	found
younger	patients	with	vascular	disease	to	be	at	higher	risk	as	well).
Symptoms	can	range	from	a	mild	burning	sensation	to	a	more	severe
pain	that	is	so	bad	patients	can’t	stand	to	have	anything	(including
clothing)	touching	the	affected	area.	Light	touch	sensitivity	is	one	of	the
hallmarks	of	this	condition.
For	patients	that	develop	acute	shingles,	the	most	important	part	of
their	treatment	may	be	early	intervention	to	prevent	progression	to	a
full-blown	PHN.	Patients	who	receive	the	appropriate	treatment	within
the	first	four	weeks	of	their	shingles	outbreak	have	a	greater	than	90%
chance	of	avoiding	a	permanent	post	herpetic	neuralgia.	The	success	rate
for	treatment	decreases	with	time;	the	farther	out	from	the	date	of	initial
outbreak	that	the	patient	receives	treatment,	the	poorer	the	results.
Patients	who	receive	treatment	during	the	second	month	have	an	80%
success	rate.	Patients	who	wait	more	than	two	months	to	seek	treatment
have	only	a	20%	success	rate	and	patients	who	wait	a	year	for	treatment
have	only	a	5%	success	rate.	Clearly,	early	intervention	is	the	key	to	a
successful	outcome.
There	is	a	very	distinct	difference	between	treating	shingles	and
preventing	or	treating	post	herpetic	neuralgia.	Patients	with	shingles	will
often	be	prescribed	antiviral	medication,	which	will	help	fight	the	active
infection	and	reduce	the	infectious	period.	These	medications	will	often
accelerate	the	healing	time	for	the	rash	and	help	dry	up	the	blisters.
There	is	no	evidence	however	that	antiviral	agents	will	reduce	the	risk	of
PHN,	a	condition	that	is	best	prevented,	rather	than	treated	later.
Therefore,	in	addition	to	treating	the	active	infection,	we	must	consider
who	is	most	at	risk	for	developing	PHN	and	then	try	to	treat	those
individuals	early,	to	prevent	the	possible	associated	nerve	damage	and
long-term	chronic	burning	pain	that	accompanies	PHN.
While	post	herpetic	neuralgia	can	be	treated	with	medications	such	as
anticonvulsants
,	tricyclic	
antidepressants
,	and	oral	narcotics,	these
are	usually	only	partially	effective	and	often	the	severe	light	touch

--- PAGE 104 ---

sensitivity	and	burning	pain	persists.	If	the	pain	doctor	sees	you	early
enough,	it	is	likely	that	they	will	recommend	a	nerve	block	to	help
reduce	the	pain	and,	as	importantly,	to	help	the	nerve	heal	without
permanent	nerve	damage.	Nerve	blocks	have	been	hypothesized	to	help
improve	nerve	blood	supply	and	thereby	help	prevent	nerve	death.	What
procedure	to	perform	is	dependent	on	the	location	of	the	shingles	on
your	body	and	how	long	it	has	been	
since	your	outbreak.	In	milder	cases
the	doctor	might	do	a	onetime	injection,	whereas	in	more	severe	cases
they	may	recommend	a	series	of	injections	over	a	one-	or	two-week
period.
The	more	pain	there	is	during	the	acute	shingles	outbreak,	the	more	it
seems	patients	are	likely	to	develop	significant	PHN	and	so	the	more
aggressive	your	doctor	will	likely	be.	If	your	shingles	outbreak	is	on	your
face	or	head,	the	injection	may	be	in	your	cervical	spine,	if	you	have
shingles	in	the	chest	area,	the	injection	may	be	in	your	thoracic	spine
(mid-back),	etc.	For	patients	with	more	aggressive	PHN,	the	doctor	may
choose	to	insert	a	
catheter
	to	allow	for	multiple	repeat	injections	or
even	a	continuous	infusion	of	local	anesthetic.	The	catheter	may	stay	in
for	about	a	week	and	after	the	last	injection	is	performed,	the	doctor	will
remove	the	catheter.
Some	patients	do	not	achieve	long-term	relief	with	nerve	blocks	and	in
these	individuals	further	attempts	at	medication	management	should	be
considered.	Intra-lesional	injections	have	been	advocated	by	some,	as
has	Capsaicin	treatment.	If	severe	pain	persists,	a	trial	of	spinal	cord
stimulation	may	be	considered.	This	intervention	for	PHN	has,	at	best,	a
50%	success	rate	and	is	reserved	for	the	more	extreme	cases.

--- PAGE 105 ---

CHAPTER	20
IMPLANTABLE	TECHNIQUES:	SPINAL	CORD
STIMULATION	SPINAL	DRUG	DELIVERY
SYSTEM	PERIPHERAL	NERVE/FIELD
STIMULATION
Y
ou	and	your	doctor	by	now	should	have	a	pretty	good	understanding
of	what	is	causing	your	severe	
chronic	pain
.	Maybe	you	have	tried
several	of	the	other	treatments	described	elsewhere	in	this	book	but	still
have	disabling	pain	that	limits	your	functional	capacity.	Or	perhaps	the
other	treatments	you	have	tried,	like	high-dose	medications,	were
associated	with	significant	side	effects	that	limited	your	function.
Implantable	techniques	involve	insertion	of	a	semi-permanent	device
into	the	body	to	control	pain	and	may	be	an	option	to	consider	at	this
point.	Implantable	therapies	work	by	acting	on	the	nervous	system	to
block	or	distract	from	the	sensation	of	pain	and	are	referred	to	broadly
as	neuromodulation	therapies.
Spinal	Cord	Stimulation
One	alternative	your	doctor	might	explore	when	other	methods	have
failed	is	spinal	cord	stimulation	(SCS)	(
figure	20.1
).	This	therapy
involves	the	application	of	microcurrents	of	electricity	to	certain	areas	of
the	spinal	cord.	The	most	common	use	of	SCS	in	North	America	is	to
treat	pain.	However,	in	Europe	these	devices	are	used	to	treat	blood	flow
insufficiency,	usually	in	the	legs,	but	sometimes	even	in	the	heart.	No
one	knows	for	certain	how	SCS	really	works,	although	there	are	several

--- PAGE 106 ---

well-developed	theories.	In	selected	cases	it	can	be	remarkably	effective
at	relieving	pain	and	improving	functional	capacity.
SCS	produces	a	sensation	of	tingling	in	the	painful	area	of	the	body
that	changes	the	way	pain	is	perceived.	Sometimes	referred	to	as	a
distraction	therapy,	SCS	seems	to	block	or	alter	the	perception	of	pain	at
the	level	of	the	
central	nervous	system
	(brain	and	spinal	cord).	You
may	be	familiar	with	
TENS	(transcutaneous	electrical	nerve
stimulation)
	units	or	interferential	units	with	pads	that	you	wear	over
the	painful	area	of	the	body,	but	SCS	is	something	entirely	different.	If
you’ve	tried	TENS	(a	less	invasive,	topical	form	of	electrical	stimulation)
and	haven’t	had	success	with	that	therapy,	don’t	assume	SCS	won’t	work
for	you.	In	fact,	there	is	no	meaningful	correlation	between	whether
TENS	helps	or	not	and	the	effectiveness	of	SCS	(or,	for	that	matter,
peripheral	nerve	stimulation).
SCS	was	developed	for	the	treatment	of	neuropathic	(nerve)	pain.	This
pain	is	typically	associated	with	injury	to	nerves	and	is	described	by
patients	as	burning,	shooting,	or	tingling.	It	may	be	associated	with
other	neurologic	changes	like	painful	numbness	or	a	greatly	increased
sensitivity	to	things	that	would	not	normally	produce	pain,	such	as	light
touch.	For	example,	diabetes	can	attack	nerves	in	the	arms	and	legs	and
produce	a	severe	burning	or	tingling	sensation	that	might	be	associated
with	numbness	and	pain.	This	kind	of	pain	typically	does	not	respond
well	to	narcotic	pain	relievers.	When	it	was	first	used	in	patients,	SCS
was	more	or	less	restricted	to	the	treatment	of	purely	neuropathic	pain
of	the	arms	or	legs.	Recent	advances	in	technology	have	made	it	more
useful	for	the	management	of	pain	in	other	areas	of	the	body,	such	as	in
the	back	or	pelvis.
Getting	Started	with	Spinal	Cord	Stimulation
This	therapy	is	not	for	everyone.	First	of	all,	it	involves	having	a	medical
device	implanted	into	your	body.	Although	some	physicians	advocate
earlier	use	of	this	modality,	most	will	at	least	attempt	a	more
conservative	treatment	approach	and	only	turn	to	SCS	if	those	methods
fail	to	achieve	adequate	relief	for	the	patient.
Like	spinal	drug	delivery	systems,	SCS	systems	are	expensive,	so	the
Medicare	program	and	most	major	insurers	require	a	psychological

--- PAGE 107 ---

evaluation	to	screen	for	conditions	that	can	limit	this	therapy’s
effectiveness.	You	will	have	to	perform	a	trial	before	the	permanent
implant	is	inserted.	SCS	trials	typically	last	three	to	seven	days.	For	the
trial,	your	doctor	will	place	wires	through	a	needle	into	the	
epidural
space
	and	steer	these	to	lie	over	specific	areas	of	your	
spinal	cord.
During	the	procedure,	you	must	be	aware	enough	to	answer	questions
about	whether	you	feel	stimulation	and	where	you	feel	it.	The	doctor
will	try	to	find	a	position	for	the	wires	that	allows	electrical	stimulation,
perceived	as	a	soothing	tingling	sensation,	overlying	the	painful	areas.
Once	a	good	location	is	identified,	your	doctor	will	secure	wires,	called
leads,	to	your	skin.	A	temporary	external	pulse	generator	(battery)	will
be	attached	to	the	end	of	the	lead	that’s	outside	your	body,	and	this	is
programmed	to	provide	stimulation	(a	soothing	tingling	sensation)	to	the
areas	of	the	body	where	pain	is	experienced.	A	good	way	to	think	of
stimulation	techniques	is	as	a	distraction	therapy;	it	covers	up	or	masks
the	pain	by	giving	the	central	nervous	system	a	different	sensation	in	the
same	area	as	the	pain.	There	are	eight	different	contacts	on	each	lead,
and	each	of	those	can	be	positive,	negative,	or	off.	You	and	your	doctor
literally	have	thousands	of	combinations	available	to	optimize	the
stimulation	pattern.	You	will	carry	this	around	with	you	during	the	trial
period,	and	you	will	be	asked	to	keep	track	of	whether	the	stimulation
relieves	pain	and	what	effect	it	may	have	on	your	ability	to	do	your
activities	of	daily	living.	At	some	point	you	and	your	doctor	will	then
decide	whether	it	makes	sense	to	have	one	of	these	devices	permanently
implanted	into	your	body.	Depending	on	the	particulars	of	your	case	and
your	doctor’s	local	practice,	the	test	procedure	might	be	conducted	by
one	doctor	(an	interventional	pain	physician)	and	the	permanent
implantation	might	be	done	by	a	spine	surgeon.
How	it	Works
The	SCS	system	consists	of	a	programmable	(and	usually	rechargeable)
pulse	generator	(the	battery)	that	generates	the	individual	and	particular
stimulation	pattern	for	that	patient.	The	generator	is	connected	under
the	skin	to	leads	that	are	placed	in	the	
spinal	canal
	as	described	above.
Your	“mileage”	on	the	battery	will	be	determined	by	how	often	you	use
it	and	how	high	the	settings	are.	Replacing	the	battery	means	replacing

--- PAGE 108 ---

the	entire	pacemaker-sized	pulse	generator.	The	leads	come	in	two	types:
those	that	can	be	placed	through	a	needle	(
percutaneous
	leads)	and
those	that	are	placed	surgically	(paddle	leads).	Paddle	leads	are	more
stable	in	terms	of	position	and	more	energy	efficient,	but	traditionally
have	been	associated	with	the	need	for	greater	surgical	trauma	during
insertion	and	hence	a	longer	recovery	period	(recent	developments	may
change	this	need	for	open	surgery	to	place	all	paddle	leads).	
Both
approaches	have	their	merits	and	you	should	discuss	these	with	your
physician.
One	advantage	of	SCS	is	that	it	gives	you	quite	a	bit	of	control.	You
will	get	a	controller	that	works	a	lot	like	the	remote	for	your	TV.	You
can	turn	it	on	or	off,	select	different	therapeutic	programs,	and	control
the	stimulation.	Another	major	advantage	of	SCS	is	that	it	uses
electricity	instead	of	drugs,	so	there	are	no	nasty	side	effects	to	speak	of.
In	fact,	many	patients	who	use	these	systems	find	they	can	reduce	their
daily	medication	intake,	and	some	can	even	eliminate	medications
altogether.
Side	Effects	and	Complications
As	with	any	surgery,	there	are	risks	associated	with	implanting	these
devices.	One	of	the	most	problematic	is	infection.	Because	these	devices
are	a	foreign	body	and	therefore	do	not	receive	direct	blood	flow,	an
infection	in	your	unit	probably	will	not	respond	to	treatment	with
antibiotics,	and	the	system	will	likely	have	to	be	removed.	You	can	have
another	device	put	in	after	the	infection	is	completely	resolved,	but	you
might	have	to	work	with	an	infectious	disease	specialist	the	next	time
around.
Once	you	have	an	SCS	system	implanted,	you	generally	can’t	have
MRI	examinations.	The	wires	of	the	stimulator	leads	or	the	generator	can
heat	up	and	theoretically	cause	damage.	In	some	cases,	you	might	be
able	to	have	an	MRI	of	the	head	or	an	extremity	in	a	special	scanner,	but
otherwise	a	
CT	scan
	may	be	a	reasonable	substitute.	Another	potential
problem	with	SCS	systems	is	that	the	lead	wires	can	migrate,	which
causes	a	loss	in	coverage	over	the	painful	areas	and	makes	the	device
less	effective	than	before.	In	some	cases,	the	units	can	be	reprogrammed
to	get	the	stimulation	back.	If	reprogramming	doesn’t	work,	then	the

--- PAGE 109 ---

leads	might	require	surgical	repositioning.	Other	mechanical
complications	include	lead	fracture,	which	requires	lead	replacement.
Spinal	Drug	Delivery	Systems
A	
spinal	drug	delivery	system
	infuses	medicines	directly	into	the
spinal	fluid	and	to	the	spinal	cord.	Cells	that	have	a	big	influence	on	the
perception	of	pain	are	located	in	the	spinal	cord,	and	this	direct	delivery
can	have	a	very	potent	and	profound	pain-relieving	effect	(
figure	20.2
).
These	benefits	are	achieved	at	total	dosages	that	are	much	lower	than	it
would	take	to	get	the	same	effect	from	pills,	
which	limits	side	effects.
When	you	take	pain	medication	by	mouth,	only	a	small	portion	of	the
drug	molecules	actually	reach	the	sites	in	the	brain	and	the	spinal	cord
where	they	exert	their	powerful	effects.	Your	liver	metabolizes	a	lot	of
the	medication	before	it	can	even	get	to	where	it’s	going,	and	your
circulatory	system	sends	those	drug	molecules	everywhere	in	your	body
—even	your	hair—so	it	gets	heavily	diluted.	Drug	molecules	that	treat
pain	typically	work	on	the	central	nervous	system	and	have	to	penetrate
the	blood-brain	barrier	before	they	can	exert	their	effect.	These	obstacles
can	sometimes	be	overcome	by	increasing	the	dose,	but	this	also
increases	the	side	effects,	including	decreased	cognition.
What	if	we	could	bypass	the	liver,	the	circulatory	system,	and	the
blood-brain	barrier	with	a	“smart	bomb”	of	pain	medicine?	Well,	about
30	years	ago	an	
anesthesiologist
	was	getting	desperate	about	one	of	his
patients	who	had	serious	cancer-related	pain,	so	he	decided	to	try
injecting	morphine	directly	into	the	spinal	fluid	to	see	if	it	would	help.
And	it	did!	It	wasn’t	long	before	this	discovery	found	its	way	into
chronic	pain	management.
Getting	Started	with	Spinal	Drug	Delivery	Systems
Before	you	get	too	excited	you	should	know	that	these	systems	are	not
for	everyone.	Patients	with	persistent	severe	and	disabling	pain	or	who
experience	serious	side	effects	from	medications	are	the	typical
candidates	for	this	type	of	therapy.	Generally,	a	surgically	implanted
pump	is	a	treatment	of	last	resort	and	should	only	be	considered	in

--- PAGE 110 ---

circumstances	where	just	about	everything	else	that	can	reasonably	be
done	to	treat	the	problem	has	already	been	tried.
It’s	very	important	to	have	realistic	expectations	about	what	this
therapy	can	do	for	you.	Most	doctors	consider	this	therapy	successful	if
the	patient	can	achieve	at	least	50%	to	60%	pain	relief	over	a	sustained
period	of	time.	As	with	any	approach,	it’s	usually	just	not	realistic	to
expect	100%	relief.	After	all,	drug	therapy	doesn’t	solve	the	problem	that
produced	the	pain	in	the	first	place.	It	serves	instead	to	change	the
perception	of	the	pain	that	results	from	the	condition.
This	therapy	is	particularly	expensive	to	start,	but	it’s	usually	cheaper
to	maintain	than	oral	medications.	You	could	buy	a	nice	car	with	the
amount	of	money	it	takes	to	get	the	device	implanted	in	the	first	place.
And	just	like	a	car,	it	needs	to	be	refueled	periodically.	Refills	for	the
pump	are	generally	cheaper	in	the	long-run	than	pills,	so	these	devices
can	ultimately	result	in	an	overall	savings	in	
health	care	costs.	Because
of	the	cost,	Medicare	programs	and	most	insurance	companies	require	a
psychological	evaluation	and	trial	first	(like	a	car,	you	get	to	take	this
out	for	a	test	drive	before	buying).	In	most	cases	a	psychological
examination	will	be	required	to	screen	for	conditions,	like	severe
uncontrolled	depression,	a	factor	that	can	be	a	barrier	to	effective	pain
management.
Your	doctor	will	place	medication	into	your	spinal	canal	as	a	test	to
determine	whether	this	therapy	helps	your	pain.	The	trial	period	can	last
anywhere	from	a	few	hours	up	to	about	a	week,	depending	on	the
technique	your	physician	uses.	Some	patients	find	it	helpful	to	write
down	their	experiences	during	the	trial	period	so	they	can	compare	it	to
their	usual	pain.	If	the	trial	period	proves	successful,	you	and	your
doctor	may	decide	to	place	a	more	permanent	system.
How	it	Works
The	system	itself	consists	of	a	drug	pump	and	a	
catheter
	that	delivers
medication	directly	into	the	spinal	canal.	Depending	on	the
circumstances,	the	catheter	can	be	placed	in	one	of	two	locations	in	the
spinal	canal:	the	epidural	space	or	the	
subarachnoid
	space.	If	the
catheter	is	in	the	epidural	space,	the	drug	has	to	find	its	way	across	the
dura	to	get	into	the	spinal	fluid.	If	the	catheter	is	in	the	subarachnoid

--- PAGE 111 ---

space,	then	the	medication	goes	directly	into	the	spinal	fluid;	this	is
known	as	an	
intrathecal	drug	delivery	system
.	The	vast	majority	of
pumps	deliver	medications	intrathecally	because	of	the	significant
decreased	dosage	requirement	(tenfold	difference).
Permanent	intrathecal	drug	delivery	systems	are	totally	implanted
under	the	skin,	both	the	pump	and	the	catheter.	You	don’t	see	the	device
directly,	but	the	pump,	which	is	about	the	size	of	a	hockey	puck,	will	be
visible	if	you	are	thin	and	visit	the	beach.	Your	body	size	will	determine
how	much	it	protrudes	and	how	well	you	can	hide	the	pump.	A
programmable	pump	can	be	reset	by	sending	messages	to	the	pump	with
radio	waves,	thereby	allowing	the	physician	to	change	the	daily	dosage
without	touching	the	patient.
Sometimes	with	cancer	patients	the	catheter	is	placed	into	the
epidural	space	and	then	attached	to	an	external	pump	that	you	carry
around	with	you	(usually	in	a	“fanny	pack”).	The	useful	life	of	an
epidural	system	is	shorter	because	they	eventually	become	clogged	or
infected	and	have	to	be	removed.
As	of	2010,	the	Food	and	Drug	Administration	has	officially	approved
three	medications	for	use	in	these	systems,	but	other	medications	are
frequently	and	safely	used	to	optimize	pain	
control.	Commonly	used
narcotic-type	medications	include	morphine,	dilaudid,	fentanyl,	and
occasionally	sufentanil.	Other	adjuvant	medications	frequently	used
include	
bupivacaine
	(a	local	anesthetic)	that	seems	to	help	lower
narcotic	requirements,	clonidine	for	neuropathic	pain,	and	
baclofen
	for
muscular	spasticity.	Prialt
®
	was	the	last	intrathecal	drug	to	be	approved
by	the	FDA,	and	is	useful	for	neuropathic	pain.	It	is	extremely	expensive
and	requires	frequent	refills;	it	should	only	be	used	when	other
medications	are	not	effective.
Side	Effects	and	Complications
As	effective	as	these	spinal	drug	delivery	systems	can	be,	they	can	have
side	effects	and	complications	too.	There	are	risks	associated	with	the
anesthesia	and	surgery	needed	to	get	the	device	into	your	body	in	the
first	place.	If	the	system	becomes	infected	it’s	usually	impossible	to	treat
with	antibiotics	because	the	body	cannot	effectively	fight	the	bacteria
that	accumulate	on	the	surface	of	the	implant;	antibiotics	can’t	be

--- PAGE 112 ---

delivered	by	your	body’s	bloodstream	to	the	site	of	the	infection,	the
implant	or	foreign	body	itself.	If	infection	occurs,	the	system	will
probably	have	to	be	removed.
The	side	effects	of	the	drugs	used	in	these	systems	are	pretty	much	the
same	as	when	these	same	drugs	are	administered	by	other	means.
However,	because	it’s	possible	to	get	better	pain	relief	with	drugs	given
into	the	spinal	canal	at	much	lower	dosages,	you	may	find	you	have	less
severe	side	effects	with	a	spinal	drug	delivery	system.	A	commonly
quoted	rule	of	thumb	is	that	you	can	get	as	much	pain	relief	from	one
milligram	of	morphine	delivered	directly	into	the	spinal	fluid	as	you	can
from	taking	200	to	300	milligrams	a	day	by	mouth!
There	are	two	complications	that	are	more	or	less	specific	to	these
systems.	One	is	that	delivering	drugs	in	this	way	can	produce	persistent
swelling	in	your	ankles,	called	
edema
.	Trying	different	drugs	or
combinations	of	drugs	may	be	required	to	manage	the	problem.	Some
patients	may	need	to	take	water	pills	to	help	them	eliminate	the	extra
fluid.	In	more	severe	cases,	dosages	may	need	to	be	lowered	or	the
therapy	discontinued.	A	second	and	common	problem	is	hypogonadism
or	suppression	of	testosterone	levels	in	the	body	(intrathecal	narcotics
can	also	effect	estrogen	levels	but	this	is	less	common).	Hypogonadism
can	occur	in	anyone	receiving	long-term,	moderate	to	high	dosages	of
narcotics	via	any	delivery	approach	(oral,	transdermal,	or	intrathecal).	A
less	common	problem	
is	chronic	urinary	retention	(difficulty	emptying
the	bladder);	this	can	also	lead	to	fluid	retention.
A	more	serious	problem	that	can	occur	with	spinal	drug	delivery
systems	is	called	a	
catheter	tip	granuloma
.	It	doesn’t	happen	very	often
but	when	it	does,	it	requires	urgent	diagnosis	and	treatment.	Under
certain	conditions,	a	mass	of	inflammatory	cells	and	other	material	can
form	near	the	tip	of	the	catheter	as	it	sits	in	your	spinal	canal.	If	the
mass	gets	big	enough,	it	can	result	in	compression	of	nerve	roots	and	a
progressive	loss	of	pain	relief.	The	physician	needs	to	have	a	high	index
of	suspicion	and	watch	carefully	for	changes	in	neurologic	function,	loss
of	pain	control,	or	the	development	of	new	pain	symptoms.	The	most
dependable	way	to	diagnose	this	problem	is	to	get	an	MRI	and	look	for
the	inflammatory	mass	at	the	tip	of	the	catheter.	This	means	it	has	to	be
read	by	a	radiologist	who	knows	what	your	doctor	is	looking	for.	If	you
get	a	catheter	tip	granuloma	and	the	problem	is	severe	enough,	you	may

--- PAGE 113 ---

need	to	have	surgery	to	release	the	compression.	More	typically	this	is
managed	by	turning	off	the	infusion	of	medications	through	the	pump,
changing	the	fluid	inside	the	pump	to	saline,	and	allowing	the	body	to
absorb	the	granuloma.	Changing	the	catheter	is	always	an	option,	but
care	must	be	taken	during	removal	to	prevent	further	spinal	damage	(the
catheter	can	adhere	to	nerves	or	the	spinal	cord).
Doctors	and	pharmaceutical	companies	are	always	conducting
research	to	develop	better	drugs	that	have	fewer	side	effects.	And	the
medical	device	companies	are	always	looking	for	ways	to	produce	better
systems	that	have	fewer	complications.	One	concern	that	patients	have
about	using	this	therapy	is	that	they	might	not	feel	pain	if	they	injure
themselves.	Don’t	worry.	If	you’re	doing	something	that	is	truly	harmful,
your	body	will	let	you	know.
Peripheral	Nerve/Field	Stimulation
Peripheral	nerve	stimulation	(PNS)	uses	similar	principles	to	SCS	to	treat
pain.	By	stimulating	
peripheral	nerves
	one	can	also	provide	treatment
of	a	variety	of	painful	conditions	that	affect	a	discrete	localized	area.
Examples	include	
occipital	nerve
	stimulation	for	headaches,	sacral
nerve	stimulation	for	pelvic	pain,	and	subcutaneous	field	stimulation	of
the	abdominal	wall	for	treatment	of	post-herniorrhaphy	pain.
With	this	technique,	stimulating	leads	are	placed	near,	or	directly	on,
peripheral	nerves	to	provide	‘coverage’	of	the	painful	area.	When
subcutaneous	nerve	stimulation	is	utilized,	some	refer	to	this	as	field
stimulation	to	separate	it	from	direct	peripheral	nerve	stimulation.	In
general,	these	are	new	areas	of	study,	and	much	work	remains	in	the
study	of	this	form	of	stimulation.
Finding	Additional	Information
Medical	device	companies	have	educational	videos	that	you	can	view	to
get	more	information	about	these	treatments.	You	can	also	access	their
websites.	Although	you	can’t	believe	everything	you	read	on	the
Internet,	the	best	place	to	start	your	own	investigation	is	to	get	approved
information	from	a	reputable	company.	Spinal	cord	stimulators	are

--- PAGE 114 ---

currently	manufactured	by	three	companies	(Boston	Scientific,
Medtronic,	and	St.	Jude	Medical)	and	all	three	offer	information	on	their
devices.	The	most	commonly	used	spinal	drug	delivery	system	is
manufactured	by	Medtronic	(a	programmable	pump),	but	several	other
companies	make	non-programmable	pumps	and	several	others	are	about
to	be	released	into	the	market.

--- PAGE 115 ---

CHAPTER	21
CANCER	PAIN:
EFFECTIVE	CONTROL
IS	USUALLY	POSSIBLE
W
hen	the	subject	of	cancer	is	brought	up,	most	people	think	of
chemotherapy
,	radiation,	the	lost	hair	and	weight,	as	well	as	the	severe
pain	that	can	accompany	this	diagnosis.	When	someone	has	cancer,	the
first	specialty	that	comes	to	mind	is	
oncology
,	and	that	needs	to	be	the
guiding	treatment	whenever	possible,	but	pain	management	also	needs
to	be	considered.	With	proper	pain	management,	using	the	vast	array	of
treatments	available	today,	cancer	pain	can	usually	be	controlled;
however,	accessing	those	treatment	options	isn’t	always	easy.	Because
the	well-intentioned	oncologist	concentrates	on	the	disease	and	its
potential	cure,	pain	management	often	isn’t	fully	addressed.	Being
informed	and	knowing	what	questions	to	ask	improves	your	chance	that
these	options	will	be	made	available.
Cancer	pain	is	one	of	the	more	challenging	areas	of	pain	management.
Many	factors	must	be	considered	when	deciding	on	a	course	of
treatment.	Some	people	need	pain	management	to	treat	the	side	effects
that	arise	from	the	cancer	treatments.	For	example,	neuropathic	pain	can
result	from	radiation	or	chemotherapy-induced	neuropathy	(nerve
damage).	In	some	cases,	the	patient	is	left	with	a	constant	and	painful
reminder	of	the	chemotherapy	or	radiation	after	the	cancer	is	cured.
Treating	both	the	pain	and	the	cancer	requires	great	flexibility	on	both
the	pain	physician’s	and	oncologist’s	part	to	optimize	coordination	of
care.	For	example,	the	timing	of	invasive	treatments	needs	to	be
coordinated	with	chemotherapy	schedules	because	chemo	lowers	the

--- PAGE 116 ---

white	blood	cell	count	(which	increases	risk	of	infection)	and	lowers	the
platelet	count	(which	increases	the	
risk	of	bleeding).	For	the	patient	with
terminal	cancer,	there	are	many	other	issues	to	consider	when	discussing
pain	treatment	options,	including	how	it	will	affect	other	long-term	care
needs.	There	are	also	multiple	psychosocial	issues	surrounding	the	end
of	life	that	must	be	dealt	with	in	a	coordinated	approach	when	planning
and	considering	treatment	alternatives.	Some	pain	physicians	prefer	not
to	work	with	cancer	patients	because	they	have	not	had	the	training	or
experience	to	feel	comfortable	doing	so.
With	cancer,	as	with	any	other	painful	condition,	it	is	extremely
important	to	determine	the	precise	cause	of	symptoms.	Is	the	pain
coming	from	a	nerve	being	compressed	or	invaded	by	a	tumor?	Is	it
coming	from	tumor	growth	into	soft	tissue	or	adjacent	structures?	Is	it
distention	of	an	organ?	Or	is	it	the	growth	of	tumor	into	a	bone	and/or
fracture	of	a	weakened	bone	from	tumor	invasion?	Determining	the
precise	cause	of	the	symptoms	is	essential	to	effective	treatment.
Treatments	for	cancer	pain	can	vary	from	the	very	simple	to	the	very
complicated.	Some	of	these	treatments	carry	incredible	risk,	and	some
are	not	even	invasive.	Less	invasive	treatments	can	include	the	use	of
radiation	therapy	to	shrink	a	tumor.	Touch	therapy	is	a	less	invasive
therapy	with	virtually	no	risk.	Chemotherapy	and	radiation	therapy	can
provide	both	treatment	of	the	cancer	and	reduction	of	pain.	
Bony
metastases
	are	often	very	painful	because	of	the	bone	destruction	they
cause;	radiation	is	frequently	used	for	this	type	of	pain.	Chemotherapy
will	also	hopefully	cause	the	tumor	to	shrink,	which	can	relieve	pressure
on	surrounding	nerves.	However,	when	these	treatments	fail	to	control
the	pain,	the	patient	will	need	to	look	for	alternative	measures.
Various	treatments	can	be	considered	for	cancer	pain,	and	entire
medical	textbooks	have	been	written	about	the	many	options	that	exist.
In	this	chapter,	we	will	provide	a	cursory	overview	of	the	more	common
treatments	for	some	of	the	more	common	types	of	cancer	pain.
Oral	Medications
The	judicious	and	appropriate	use	of	various	oral	medications	is	the
cornerstone	of	cancer	pain	treatment.	The	primary	treatment	is	with	a
combination	of	opioid	or	narcotic	pain	medications	and	other

--- PAGE 117 ---

medications	that	work	hand-in-hand	with	traditional	pain	medications.
A	physician	may	use	
anti-seizure	medications	(neuroleptics),
antidepressants
,	anti-inflammatory,	and/or	other	medications	to	treat
cancer	pain,	especially	when	there	is	a	neuropathic	
component	(nerve
injury	or	nerve	damage).	In	other	words,	your	doctor	may	use	narcotic
pain	medication	to	treat	your	bone	and	soft-tissue	pain	while	using	other
medications	to	treat	associated	nerve	damage.	
Anti-inflammatories
	can
sometimes	help,	especially	with	
metastatic	bone	cancer
,	because	they
inhibit	prostaglandin	release,	which	is	associated	with	bone	pain.
Unfortunately,	many	of	these	medications	have	side	effects,	especially	at
the	dosages	required	to	treat	cancer	pain.	When	intolerable	side	effects
such	as	excessive	sedation,	confusion,	constipation,	and	nausea	occur	or
inadequate	pain	treatment	is	noted,	referral	to	an	interventional	pain
specialist	may	provide	other	more	effective	solutions.
Destructive	Block	Therapy
One	of	the	most	common	forms	of	cancer	pain	treatment	done	by
interventional	pain	physicians	is	for	pancreatic	cancer.	Unfortunately,
pancreatic	cancer	usually	presents	late	and	generally	has	a	fairly	poor
prognosis.	Patients	can	suffer	from	severe	abdominal	pain	that	is	often
not	adequately	managed	with	pain	medications.	A	specific	group	of
nerves,	the	
celiac	plexus
,	sits	behind	the	
pancreas;
	these	
innervate
	the
pancreas	and	much	of	the	other	surrounding	viscera	(abdominal	organs).
Blockade	of	this	group	of	nerves	can	provide	profound	pain	relief	when
the	pain	is	coming	from	the	pancreas	or	other	adjacent	abdominal
(visceral)	structures.	Physicians	may	choose	to	first	perform	a	diagnostic
local	anesthetic	injection	to	prove	that	it	results	in	symptomatic	relief
and	later	perform	a	
neurolytic
	(nerve-killing)	injection	to	destroy	the
celiac	nerves	to	decrease	the	patient’s	ability	to	feel	that	particular
organ.	Some	physicians	will	choose	to	proceed	directly	to	the	neurolytic
injection	(after	appropriate	discussion	with	the	patient)	to	avoid	the
need	for	multiple	treatments,	especially	when	ongoing	chemotherapy
and	other	treatments	are	required.
This	treatment	is	highly	effective	for	abdominal	pain	associated	with
pancreatic	cancer	and	other	upper	abdominal	tumors.	However,	when
pancreatic	cancer	causes	back	pain,	this	treatment	may	not	be	as

--- PAGE 118 ---

effective.	Back	pain	from	this	type	of	cancer	is	often	caused	by	erosion	of
the	pancreatic	tumor	into	the	back	muscles,	and	that	requires	an
alternative	type	of	treatment,	typically	with	
neuraxial	(spinal)	narcotic
medications
	(please	see	
chapter	20
).
There	are	many	other	nerves	in	the	body	that	can	be	blocked	for
prolonged	periods	of	time	to	treat	cancer	pain.	These	therapies	usually
require	a	
diagnostic	injection
	of	the	target	nerve	with	local	
anesthetic
to	determine	whether	this	is	a	viable	option	for	treatment	of	the	cancer-
related	pain.	(Celiac	plexus	blocks	are	so	predictable	that	some
physicians	will	bypass	this	step	with	that	type	of	block.)	Peripheral
nerve	blocks	can	treat	many	different	cancer-related	pain	syndromes,
especially	those	involving	the	abdominal	wall	or	extremity.	Rectal	pain
may	respond	to	blockade	of	the	
ganglion	impar
.	The	number	of
different	nerves	that	can	be	blocked	to	assist	with	cancer	pain
management	is	beyond	the	scope	of	this	book.
Spinal	Narcotics
Metastases	to	bone	and	primary	bone	tumors	often	can	cause	severe	pain
that	may	or	may	not	respond	to	maximal	doses	of	radiation.	When	pain
persists	in	these	regions	and	isn’t	adequately	controlled	by	oral	or
transdermal	(through	the	skin)	pain	medications,	some	consideration
should	be	given	to	spinal	narcotics.	Several	techniques	are	available,	and
the	patient’s	life	expectancy	will	often	guide	the	clinician’s	choice	of
which	technique	to	utilize.	This	may	sound	rather	cold	and	clinical,	but
it	is	really	a	consideration	guided	by	the	recovery	time	related	to	these
procedures,	the	associated	costs,	and	providing	the	best	quality	of	life	for
the	patient.
Two	basic	techniques	are	used	to	provide	spinal	narcotics:	a	
catheter
placed	into	the	
epidural	space
	or	the	
subarachnoid	space
	(called	an
intrathecal	drug	delivery	system
).	The	first	modality	is	most
appropriate	for	someone	with	a	shorter	life	expectancy	because	the
catheters	tend	to	dislodge,	clog,	and/or	break	over	longer	periods	of
time	and	there	is	a	progressively	elevated	risk	of	infection	the	longer
they	are	left	in	place	because	these	catheters	typically	exit	through	the
skin	to	an	external	pump.	However	they	require	a	much	less	invasive
surgery	and	recovery	is	almost	immediate.	Their	initial	cost	is	less	but

--- PAGE 119 ---

with	time,	(by	three	to	four	months)	they	can	become	less	cost	effective
due	to	the	higher	ongoing	maintenance	costs.
The	second	modality	is	a	more	permanent	version	and	is	used	in
patients	with	a	life	expectancy	of	four	to	six	months	or	greater.	It	is	a
more	invasive	procedure	that	requires	more	involved	surgery	and	an
overnight	hospital	admission.	The	pump	itself	is	very	expensive	(about
$20,000),	and	some	insurance	companies	will	not	cover	the	pump	for
patients	who	have	a	life	expectancy	of	less	than	six	months.	If	your
oncologist	has	given	you	a	six-month	life	expectancy,	you	need	to	decide
how	you	want	to	live	those	last	six	months.	Be	honest	with	your
physicians.	If	you	want	to	travel	for	as	long	as	possible,	then	an	external
pump	will	likely	not	be	an	option	due	to	the	need	
for	frequent	nursing
care,	and	even	an	implantable	pump	could	be	difficult	unless	you	plan	to
be	around	for	refills	(usually	once	every	month	or	two).	You	may	prefer
the	freedom	of	oral	medications.	For	more	detailed	information	on	spinal
narcotic	treatment,	see	
chapter	20
.
Cancer	pain	management	is	something	that	no	one	wants	to	talk	about
because	it	isn’t	a	cure	for	the	disease.	The	driving	focus	of	cancer
treatment	is	destroying	the	cancer	so	the	individual	can	lead	a	long	and
healthy	life.	Sometimes	the	treatment	for	this	disease	causes	
chronic
pain
,	which	in	turn	needs	to	be	treated.	In	the	most	severe	cases,	pain
management	physicians	are	brought	in	to	give	the	terminal	patient	the
best	possible	quality	of	life	for	their	remaining	days.	Whatever	the
situation,	it	is	important	to	have	a	realistic	goal	for	treatment.	Pain
control	is	about	maximizing	your	quality	of	life	while	avoiding
unwanted	side	effects	and	the	need	for	more	frequent	physician	visits.
Improved	pain	control	has	been	associated	with	improved	length	of
survival.	Successful	treatment	of	cancer	pain	is	about	communication
between	you,	your	family,	your	oncologist,	and	your	pain	management
physician.
Questions	to	Ask	Your	Physician:
1
.	
What	is	my	long-term	prognosis?
2
.	
What	are	my	treatment	goals?	For	example,	if	you	have	been	given
a	six-month	life	expectancy,	how	do	you	want	to	spend	those	six
months?	Is	it	important	to	travel?	Be	cognitively	intact?	Be	at	home

--- PAGE 120 ---

with	family	and	friends?
3
.	
What	kind	of	treatment	am	I	pursuing	with	my	oncologist—curative
or	
palliative
	(treating	symptoms	but	not	changing	the	end	result)?
Your	pain	management	treatment	and	oncology	treatments	must	be
coordinated,	as	some	treatments	can’t	be	given	at	the	same	time.

--- PAGE 121 ---

CHAPTER	22
INSURANCE:
COPAYS,	COINSURANCE,
DEDUCTIBLES,	OH	MY!
H
ealth	insurance	is	a	particularly	tricky	system	to	navigate.	Policies
change	rapidly,	leaving	patients	in	shock	when	procedures	or	tests	they
believed	would	be	covered	are	not.	There	was	a	time	when	you	would
go	to	your	doctor’s	office,	pay	your	
copay
,	and	everything	would	be
fine.	Today	we	live	in	a	world	of	insurance	policies	that	require	varying
amounts	of	patient	responsibility.	This	responsibility	is	not	just	financial.
It	isn’t	enough	to	know	how	much	your	copay	is;	you	must	know	who
participates	with	your	plan	before	you	make	an	appointment	or	if	you
need	a	primary	care	physician	referral.	The	purpose	of	this	chapter	is	to
demystify	some	of	the	insurance	language	that	is	casually	spoken	at	your
doctor’s	office	and	to	help	you	better	understand	your	benefits.
The	first	point	that	must	be	made	is	your	health	insurance	is	your
responsibility.	When	you	signed	up	for	your	health	insurance	plan,	you
were	probably	given	a	booklet	explaining	your	plan	and	your	benefits.
It’s	a	lot	of	information	thrown	at	you	very	quickly.	If	you	have	any
questions	about	what	is	covered,	which	doctors	participate	in	your	plan,
or	what	your	financial	responsibility	is,	call	your	insurer	at	the	phone
number	on	the	back	of	your	insurance	card.	This	line	is	staffed	with
professionals	who	are	trained	to	help	you	understand	your	coverage.
Remember	to	write	down	the	name	of	the	person	you	spoke	to,	as	well
as	the	date	and	time	you	spoke	to	them.	If	there	is	ever	any	question
about	the	information	you	received,	you	must	be	able	to	prove	you	made
this	phone	call.	Patients	often	believe	that	calling	their	insurance

--- PAGE 122 ---

company	is	a	job	best	left	to	the	professionals	in	their	doctor’s	office.
This	is	a	good	place	to	start,	but	because	
you	are	ultimately	responsible
for	any	bills	generated	from	the	care	you	receive,	firsthand	knowledge
from	your	own	conversation	with	the	carrier	can	be	helpful.	The	people
in	your	doctor’s	office	are	very	knowledgeable	about	insurance	in
general,	but	they	may	not	know	everything	about	your	specific	policy.
Employers	sometimes	negotiate	specific	exclusions	to	policies	to
decrease	their	costs,	and	only	the	beneficiary	(patient)	and	the	employer
are	allowed	to	see	these	specific	details	of	your	policy.
For	the	rest	of	this	chapter	we	are	going	to	discuss	the	various	terms
that	are	used	to	describe	insurance.	Understanding	these	terms	is	a	good
start	to	understanding	your	insurance	plan.
Primary	Care	Physician	Referral
This	is	a	recommendation	made	by	your	primary	care	physician
(otherwise	known	as	a	general	practitioner,	family	doctor,	internist,	or
PCP)	to	see	a	specialist.	Many	insurance	companies	require	that	you
obtain	a	referral	before	seeing	a	specialist.	This	referral	can	be	as	simple
as	a	piece	of	paper	with	the	recommendation	on	it	or	as	complex	as	a
formal	recommendation	to	your	insurance	company.	The	more	formal
recommendation	will	specify	a	number	of	times	you	can	be	seen	as	well
as	a	date	range	for	care.	The	formal	referral	will	also	have	a	reference
number.	If	your	plan	requires	the	more	formal	referral,	you	should	be
aware	of	the	referral	number,	the	number	of	visits	specified,	and	the
date	range	for	care.	If	the	number	of	times	you	are	seen	exceeds	the
amount	specified	by	the	referral	or	occurs	outside	of	the	date	range,	you
will	need	to	extend	or	increase	the	number	of	visits	in	the	referral,	or
you	may	be	responsible	for	the	doctor’s	charge.	If	you	show	up	at	the
specialist’s	office	without	a	referral	from	your	primary	care	physician,
the	office	may	turn	you	away	without	being	seen.	Save	yourself	time,
aggravation,	and	money	by	making	sure	you	have	a	referral	in	place
before	your	appointment.
Copays

--- PAGE 123 ---

Many	people	assume	that	because	the	doctor	is	being	paid	by	the
insurance	company,	he	or	she	can	afford	to	write	off	your	copay,	the
amount	of	the	doctor’s	bill	for	which	you	are	directly	responsible.	As	a
point	of	background,	it	is	likely	that	your	doctor	negotiated	a	contract
with	your	insurance	plan	so	that	he	or	she	could	be	considered	a
participating	provider.	The	insurance	company	may	
have	looked	at	the
rate	your	doctor	charges	for	various	procedures	and	negotiated	to	pay	a
percentage	of	that	charge,	or	alternatively	they	may	have	agreed	upon
an	independent	fee	schedule	that	was	mutually	acceptable	to	both	sides,
which	is	called	the	contracted	rate.	Your	insurance	company	then
decided	on	a	set	charge	that	you	are	responsible	for	if	you	see	a
specialist,	and	that’s	your	copay.	Your	copay	is	deducted	from	the
amount	the	insurance	carrier	agreed	to	pay	your	doctor	(the	contracted
rate).	If	your	doctor	doesn’t	collect	the	copay,	he	isn’t	getting	paid	the
full	amount	of	his	contracted	rate.	In	addition,	most	contracts	require
that	the	doctor	collect	this	copay	or	face	significant	penalties.	Yes,	your
doctor	can	actually	get	in	trouble	for	not	taking	your	copay.	Remember,
he	or	she	signed	a	contract	with	your	insurance	company	guaranteeing
that	he	would	collect	this	fee,	and	violating	the	contract	can	have	severe
repercussions	for	the	doctor.
Not	all	copays	are	the	same.	The	front	of	your	card	may	list	the
amount	of	your	copay	for	seeing	a	primary	care	physician	or	a	specialist.
There	may	also	be	other	copays	that	you	don’t	see	on	the	front	of	the
card.	For	example,	you	may	have	a	$500	copay	for	outpatient	surgery.
You	have	to	pay	this	copay	every	time	you	have	an	outpatient	procedure
done.	You	may	also	have	a	higher	copay	for	procedures	that	require	an
overnight	stay	at	the	hospital.	Knowing	your	copays	ahead	of	time	can
save	you	a	lot	of	time	and	aggravation.	If	you	know	your	copay,	you	will
know	if	you	are	in	a	financial	position	to	afford	a	procedure.	Some
procedures	can	be	performed	at	the	doctor’s	office	for	a	much	lower
copay	(office	copay	instead	of	an	outpatient	surgery	copay).	This	means
(in	most	cases)	that	you	won’t	be	able	to	get	intravenous	sedation,	but
many	people	would	rather	be	uncomfortable	for	a	few	minutes	than	pay
the	larger	copay;	your	doctor	can	help	guide	you	as	to	what	procedures
might	require	some	sedation.

--- PAGE 124 ---

Deductibles	and	Coinsurance
Some	insurance	plans	don’t	have	copays.	Instead,	they	use	
deductibles
and	coinsurance	as	a	means	of	passing	back	to	you	the	amount	of	money
you’re	responsible	to	pay.	Your	deductible	is	a	set	amount	of	money	that
you	have	to	pay	out	before	your	insurance	company	pays	any	of	the	bill.
For	example,	if	you	have	a	$1,000	deductible,	your	doctor	will	submit
his	or	her	charges	and	the	insurance	company	will	send	you	an
Explanation	of	Benefits	(EOB)	telling	you	what	portion	of	the	bill	you
are	responsible	to	pay.	
Your	doctor’s	office	will	get	a	copy	of	the	same
EOB	and	mail	you	a	bill	reflecting	the	money	owed.	This	balance	is	not
the	doctor’s	full	charge;	it	is	the	contracted	rate	your	doctor	has	with
your	insurance	company.	If	you	have	not	met	your	deductible	then	you
are	responsible	for	these	bills.	The	benefit	to	this	type	of	plan	(over
trying	to	negotiate	a	rate	with	your	doctor	on	your	own)	is	that	your
insurance	company	has	already	gotten	you	a	significantly	reduced	rate
as	they	have	negotiated	on	behalf	of	all	the	members	of	your	plan.	You
doctor	was	willing	to	take	less	money	from	the	company	in	exchange	for
the	increase	in	volume	of	patients	he	can	see	as	a	participating	provider.
Today	High-Deductible	Plans	are	becoming	ever	more	popular;	in	this
situation,	the	patient	is	responsible	often	for	at	least	the	first	$2,000	and
sometimes	up	to	$10,000	depending	on	the	plan.	Patients	can	often
manage	these	expenses	in	a	tax-efficient	fashion	using	a	health	savings
account	or	flexible	health	spending	account.
Once	you	have	reached	your	deductible,	your	insurance	company	may
pick	up	100%	or	you	may	be	responsible	for	coinsurance.	This	is	the
percentage	of	money	you	are	responsible	for	paying	until	you	reach	your
out-of-pocket	maximum
	for	the	year.	For	example,	let’s	imagine	that
you	go	to	see	your	doctor	after	your	deductible	has	been	met.	At	this
point,	you	are	responsible	for	20%	coinsurance:	on	a	$100	charge,	they
will	pay	$80	and	you	will	pay	$20.	They	will	send	you	an	EOB	in	the
mail	telling	you	they	paid	the	$80	they’re	responsible	for	and	you	must
now	pay	the	$20.	Most	plans	have	a	cap	on	how	much	they	expect	you
to	pay	every	year.	This	cap	is	called	your	out-of-pocket	maximum.	Some
plans	include	your	deductible	in	the	out-of-pocket	maximum	and	others
do	not.	This	is	a	good	question	to	ask	your	insurance	company	so	you
have	a	realistic	idea	of	how	much	money	you	will	have	to	pay.	High-

--- PAGE 125 ---

deductible	plans	have	become	very	popular	over	the	last	several	years,
especially	in	the	form	of	health	savings	accounts	(HSAs)	or	flexible
health	spending	accounts.	All	of	these	have	the	goal	of	controlling	the
employer’s	health	care	costs,	unfortunately,	usually	at	the	expense	of
shifting	these	costs	to	you,	the	patient.	If	you	think	this	is	all	about
shifting	more	and	more	expenses	to	you	the	patient,	then	you	have
figured	out	the	game;	congratulations.
Questions	to	Ask	Before	Your	First	Appointment:
1
.	
Does	the	doctor	participate	with	my	insurance	plan?
2
.	
Do	I	need	a	primary	care	physician	referral?
3
.	
Do	I	have	a	copay	when	I	see	a	specialist?	If	so,	what	is	the	copay?
4
.	
What	is	my	copay	for	outpatient	surgery?
5
.	
Do	I	have	a	deductible	or	coinsurance?

--- PAGE 126 ---

CHAPTER	23
WORKERS’COMPENSATION:
HOW	IT	WORKS	AND	WHAT
TO	DO	IF	IT	DOESN’T
I
f	you	were	injured	on	the	job	or	your	pain	is	related	to	repetitive-
motion	activity	at	work,	then	you	may	find	yourself	dealing	with	your
state’s	workers’	compensation	system.	If	you	are	not	frustrated	yet,	you
likely	will	be	soon.
The	workers’	compensation	system	can	be	difficult	and	aggravating	for
both	you	and	your	physician,	to	say	the	least.	There	are	multiple
obstacles	that	can	derail	or	limit	your	care.	You	and	your	physician	will
need	to	deal	with	the	insurance	company,	attorneys,	state	rules,
adjusters,	case	managers
,	and	many	other	layers	between	you	and
your	health	care.	Unfortunately,	this	only	adds	another	level	of
complexity	to	the	care	of	patients	with	
chronic	pain
.	Some	physicians
have	far	more	experience	with	workers’	compensation	care	and
understand	the	system,	which	can	help	the	patient	navigate	through	the
quicksand.	Workers’	compensation	has	historically	resisted	and	limited
pain	management	to	
claimants
	(injured	workers).	Your	initial
treatment,	and	even	surgeries,	may	have	been	approved	with	little	delay
(although	possibly	not),	but	don’t	be	surprised	if	your	care	comes	to	a
grinding	halt	when	chronic	pain	treatments	become	necessary.
The	workers’	compensation	system	was	federally	legislated	in	1906
and	was	an	insurance	instituted	to	protect	employers	from	lawsuits
arising	from	injuries	that	occurred	on	the	job.	It	was	designed	to	provide
a	system	for	injured	workers	to	receive	health	care	while	limiting	the
employer’s	exposure.	Workers’	compensation	was	intended	to	provide

--- PAGE 127 ---

care	to	workers	and	hold	the	employer	responsible	for	the	injury,	both
for	health	care	as	well	as	any	
settlement	for	long-term	damage.
However,	as	you	know,	whenever	money	is	involved,	there	are	bound	to
be	conflicts	at	multiple	levels.
To	be	fair,	the	problem	is	not	workers’	compensation	alone.
Unfortunately,	some	claimants	(injured	workers	and/or	their	physicians)
have	previously	“gamed	the	system”	to	take	advantage	of	insurance
carriers	and	their	employers.	As	the	saying	goes,	a	few	can	ruin	it	for	the
many.	Because	of	this,	the	rules	and	regulations	surrounding	workers’
compensation	have	grown	increasingly	complex	and	more	difficult.
Despite	this	cynical	outlook,	many	carriers,	case	managers,	adjusters,
and	workers’	compensation	programs	truly	care	about	their	patients	and
will	help	them	to	get	better	and	return	to	work.	However,	if	yours	is	not
one	of	them,	you	might	be	in	for	a	long	ride.
Workers’	compensation	has	multiple	levels	of	complexity.	We	will
provide	a	general	description	of	workers’	compensation	systems,	but
each	state	sets	up	its	own	rules	and	regulations	to	govern	their
individual	systems	and	your	doctor	and/or	attorney	should	be	able	to
provide	you	with	additional	guidance.	Below	are	common	terms	that
you	should	be	familiar	with.
Claimant:
	You,	the	patient.
Respondent:
	The	legal	term	for	your	workers’	compensation	carrier.
Case	manager:
	A	nurse	or	other	trained	health	care	professional	assigned
to	your	case	to	hopefully	help	expedite	and	coordinate	your	care.	He	or
she	should	be	able	to	explain	to	the	adjuster	what	type	of	treatment	your
doctor	is	recommending	and	why	it’s	a	good	idea.
Adjuster:
	Often	someone	with	little	to	no	medical	knowledge	who	works
for	the	insurance	carrier	and	is	responsible	for	making	your	health	care
coverage	decisions.	Adjusters	also	pay	your	doctor’s	and	pharmacy	bills
and	manage	other	weekly	compensation	you	may	receive	while	you	are
out	of	work.
Medical	director:
	A	physician	who	works	for	the	insurance	company	and
helps	to	oversee	their	medical	policies.	He	or	she	will	often	make
medical	decisions	about	more	complicated	or	expensive	therapies.
Peer-to-peer	review:
	This	is	supposed	to	be	an	“independent”	physician’s
review	of	the	requested	treatment	and	is	based	on	information	sent	by

--- PAGE 128 ---

the	carrier	to	the	reviewing	physician.	This	is	frequently	arranged
through	a	third	party	company	that	provides	this	type	of	review	service
and	which	contracts	with	doctors	to	provide	this	review	service.	In	most
peer-to-peer	reviews,	they	are	supposed	
to	talk	with	your	doctor	over	the
phone	before	making	a	coverage	decision.	Unfortunately,	this	process	is
fraught	with	problems.	Often	the	reviewer	is	not	given	the	full	extent	of
information	from	the	carrier	in	order	to	make	a	proper	decision.	It	is
sometimes	impossible	to	connect	with	the	other	doctor	due	to	conflicting
schedules	between	your	doctor	and	the	reviewer,	who	may	be	anywhere
in	the	country.	Another	major	problem	is	that	doctors	are	told	they	must
use	specific	guidelines,	even	if	not	recognized	by	your	particular	state,
and	these	guidelines	and	reviews	are	therefore	often	biased	toward
denial.	The	company	that	is	hired	tracks	their	denial	rate	and	uses	that
information	to	sell	their	services	to	the	various	insurance	carriers.	These
reviews	present	an	inherent	conflict	of	interest:	a	doctor	that	approves
too	much	may	not	be	asked	to	continue	doing	reviews.
IME
	(
independent	medical	examiner
):	A	physician	selected	by	your
insurance	company	to	evaluate	your	condition.	This	is	usually	a	face-to-
face	meeting	with	a	doctor	that	has	been	hired	by	your	insurance
company	as	a	second	opinion.	Unfortunately,	many	insurance	carriers
have	a	pool	of	physicians	whom	they	hire	as	“independent”	medical
examiners	because	of	their	known	biased	opinions	against	certain	pain
management	treatments.	Because	the	IME	is	selected	and	paid	for	by	the
workers’	compensation	carrier,	he	or	she	is	almost	never	unbiased.
Again,	if	they	approve	too	much,	they	are	often	not	asked	to	do	more
evaluations.
Commissioner	examiner:
	A	physician	assigned	by	the	workers’
compensation	commissioner	to	evaluate	your	case,	theoretically	a
completely	neutral	physician.	While	this	is	not	always	the	case,	it	is
about	as	fair	as	that	process	will	ever	get.
(Note:	Theoretically,	neither	a	commissioner	examiner	nor	an
independent	medical	examiner	should	subsequently	become	your
treating	physician	because	of	the	potential	for	conflict	of	interest.)
Workers’	compensation	hearing:
	Each	state	has	its	own	hearing	structure
and	format.	Hearings	can	be	of	many	types.	Informal	hearings	are	those
in	which	the	parties	gather	to	discuss	obstacles	to	care	and/or	payment
to	the	claimant	in	a	nonbinding	format.	Formal	hearings	in	most	states

--- PAGE 129 ---

are	court-like	procedures	and	have	binding	decisions	associated	with
them.	Unfortunately,	it	can	often	take	months	to	schedule	these	hearings
and	have	a	final	decision	rendered.
When	requesting	treatment,	your	physician	must	provide	appropriate
letters	of	medical	necessity	to	workers’	compensation	
that	describe	your
condition	and	the	reasons	for	the	treatment	they’re	recommending.
These	reports	should	be	typed	and	sent	to	your	carrier	to	obtain	the
necessary	approval.	Your	physician	may	be	required	to	speak	to	another
physician	on	the	phone	to	gain	approval	or	authorization	(a	
peer-to-
peer	review
).	Your	physician’s	staff	will	likely	have	to	call	the	carrier,
at	least	once	and	perhaps	20	times,	to	get	approval	or	authorization	for
your	treatment.	You	and	your	attorney	may	also	need	to	get	involved.
Your	attorney	should	be	responsible	for	helping	guide	you	through	the
legal	aspects	of	the	process.	If	your	carrier	cooperates	with	your	care,
you	may	not	need	an	attorney	to	complete	your	treatment	under
workers’	compensation.	If,	however,	you	experience	repetitive	delays	or
just	frank	denial	of	treatment,	then	consider	hiring	an	attorney	to	assist
you	through	the	workers’	compensation	process.	Your	attorney	will
typically	be	paid	from	a	percentage	of	your	settlement	and/or	other
decisions.	Unfortunately,	once	you	hire	an	attorney	in	the	workers’
compensation	system	it	is	usually	extremely	difficult	to	switch	to	a	new
attorney	if	the	first	one	is	not	working	out.	Be	careful	to	hire	an	attorney
who	cares	about	your	medical	treatment	and	understands	the	system.	He
or	she	needs	to	protect	your	rights	to	receive	medical	treatment,	not	just
his	or	her	right	to	receive	a	portion	of	your	payment/settlement.
NOTE:
	Some	of	the	above	terms,	as	well	as	the	exact	laws,	will	vary
from	state	to	state	but	the	general	principles	are	similar.

--- PAGE 130 ---

CONCLUSION
In	this	book	we	have	tried	to	explain	the	basics	regarding	chronic	pain,
including	its	causes	and	treatments.	Understanding	many	of	the
treatments	that	are	available	requires	some	basic	understanding	of
anatomy;	if	you	have	had	trouble	following	some	of	the	treatments,	we
urge	you	to	go	back	and	at	least	look	through	some	of	the	pertinent
sections	within	the	anatomy	chapter	(
chapter	4
).
Perhaps	most	importantly,	we	have	tried	to	educate	you	in	how	to
identify	a	physician	who	has	the	training	and	expertise	to	get	to	the	root
of	your	problem.	Today,	highly	specialized	pain	medicine	physicians
exist	to	expertly	and	carefully	identify	the	cause	of	your	symptoms.
Interventional	pain	management	is	a	subspecialty	of	pain	medicine	that
uses	precision-guided	fluoroscopic	injections	to	both	help	determine
(diagnose)	the	precise	cause	of	pain	and	to	assist	in	its	treatment.
Most	pain	conditions	can	be	treated	and	the	symptoms	eased.	Pain
management	rarely	means	pain	cure,	but	rather	refers	to	the	long-term
management	of	the	condition	to	minimize	the	effects	on	normal
activities	of	daily	living.	Realistic	expectations	are	essential	to	an
outcome	that	satisfies	both	the	patient	and	the	doctor.
Future	editions	of	this	book	will	update	advances	that	have	occurred
in	treatment	and	the	understanding	of	these	various	diseases.	Please	feel
free	to	provide	us	with	comments	about	how	we	can	improve	this	book
in	subsequent	editions.

--- PAGE 131 ---

GLOSSARY
Note:
	All	Glossary	terms	are	marked	in	
bold
	throughout	the	text	for
easy	reference.
Acupuncture:
	This	is	a	traditional	form	of	Chinese	medicine	that
involves	placing	very	small	needles	into	the	body	along	certain	lines	of
energy	(meridians)	to	treat	a	multitude	of	health	conditions,	including
pain.
Acupuncturist:
	A	physician	specializing	in	the	use	of	acupuncture	for
treatment.
Adhesiolysis:
	A	procedure	to	break	up	scar	tissue	that	has	formed
around	nerves	in	the	spinal	canal.
Adipose	tissue:
	The	fatty	tissue	of	the	body.
Adjuster:
	An	employee	of	a	workers’	compensation	insurance	carrier
who	helps	to	process	and	administer	the	claim	and	is	usually	responsible
for	deciding	whether	a	treatment	is	approved.	Adjusters	are	typically	not
nurses	or	health	care	professionals	and	have	limited	clinical	knowledge.
Adrenaline:
	A	natural	stimulant	released	by	the	adrenal	gland	and	other
nerve	endings	in	the	body	to	stimulate	certain	body	functions.	Release	is
typically	increased	in	response	to	stress.
Agonist:
	A	drug	or	chemical	that	stimulates	a	specific	receptor	to	cause
a	desired	effect.	An	agonist	will	cause	the	cell	to	perform	the	same
function	that	the	stimulated	nerve	receptor	would	normally	initiate.
Ankylosing	spondylitis:
	A	type	of	arthritis	or	connective	tissue	disorder
that	affects	specific	joints	of	the	body	and,	more	specifically,	the

--- PAGE 132 ---

sacroiliac	joints	and	other	parts	of	the	spine.
Androgenic	steroids:
	Male	hormones	such	as	testosterone.
Anesthesiologist:
	A	doctor	who	has	been	trained	in	the	field	of
anesthesia.
Annulus:
	The	outer	wall	of	a	spinal	disc,	made	up	of	fibers	that	circle
and	strengthen	the	disc.	An	intact	annulus	helps	to	constrain	the	nucleus
(or	center	of	the	disc)	from	leaking	or	herniating	(pushing	out).
Antagonist:
	A	drug	or	chemical	that	counteracts	or	inhibits	the	action	at
a	receptor.	This	would	prevent	or	decrease	the	cell’s	ability	to	perform
the	function	that	this	receptor	normally	causes.
Anterior:
	Towards	the	front	side	of	the	body.
Anti-anxiety	medications	(anxiolytics):
	Medications	that	reduce	or
control	anxiety.
Anticonvulsants:
	Medications	that	stabilize	nerve	membranes	and	treat
nerve	pain,	also	used	for	the	treatment	of	seizures.
Antidepressants:
	Medications	used	in	the	treatment	of	depression.
Anti-inflammatories:
	Medications	used	to	treat	inflammation,	such	as	is
seen	with	arthritis.
Anti-seizure	medicines:
	Medications	that	work	in	the	same	way	as
anticonvulsants	to	stabilize	nerve	membranes	and	treat	nerve	pain,
particularly	used	for	the	treatment	of	seizures.
Aorta:
	The	largest	artery	of	the	body.	This	vessel	comes	off	of	the	heart
and	all	the	remaining	arteries	are	fed	from	this	large	vessel	as	it	travels
through	the	chest	and	abdomen.
Arrhythmias:
	Abnormal	heart	rhythm	(heart	beat).
Arthralgia:
	Joint	pain	and	usually	implying	involvement	of	more	than

--- PAGE 133 ---

one	joint.	Does	not	indicate	the	cause	of	pain	but	rather	it	is	a	term	that
is	descriptive	as	to	the	quality	of	pain.
Arthroscopy:
	Direct	visualization	with	a	device	that	allows	the
physician	to	look	inside	a	joint.
Atlanto-axial	(AA)	joints:
	Paired	joints	(one	on	each	side)	between	the
top	two	vertebrae	of	the	spine.
Atlanto-occipital	(AO)	joints:
	Paired	joints	(one	on	each	side)	between
the	base	of	the	skull	and	the	first	vertebra	of	the	spine.
Atlas:
	The	first	vertebra	of	the	spine.
Auriculotemporal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	to	the	area
around	the	ear	and	temple.
Axis:
	The	second	vertebra	of	the	spine.
Baclofen:
	An	antispasmodic	medication	commonly	used	in	the
treatment	of	multiple	sclerosis	and	injuries	associated	with	muscle
spasm.
Behavioral	counseling:
	Psychological	counseling	that	is	used	to	modify
behaviors	that	are	abnormal	and	are	contributing	to	the	perpetuation	of
pain.
Biacuplasty
®
:
	A	heated-needle	treatment	used	for	pain	that	is	caused	by
an	abnormal	and	painful	disc.
“Blind”	injections:
	An	injection	done	without	radiologic	guidance.
Blood	thinners:
	Medications	that	are	used	to	keep	the	blood	from
clotting	in	a	patient	with	a	history	of	excessive	clotting.
Bone	scan:
	A	nuclear	medicine	test	that	involves	the	injection	of
radioactive-labeled	material	to	detect	active	areas	of	bone	remodeling	in
the	presence	of	an	acute	fracture,	infection,	or	arthritis.

--- PAGE 134 ---

Bony	metastasis:
	Cancer	that	has	spread	from	its	primary	location	to
the	bone.
Botulinum	toxin:
	More	widely	recognized	as	Botox
®
.	This	is	a	synthetic
drug	that	is	injected	into	muscles	to	provide	prolonged	muscle
relaxation.
Brachial	plexus:
	The	collection	of	nerves	that	supply	the	arm	with
motor	function	and	sensation.
Bupivacaine:
	A	long-acting	local	anesthetic.
Cardiologist:
	A	doctor	who	specializes	in	treating	heart	conditions.
Cannula:
	A	hollow	tube	used	by	doctors	for	medical	treatments.	These
tubes	come	in	many	different	sizes	ranging	from	tiny	to	large.
C-arm:
	An	x-ray	machine	that	allows	the	doctor	to	take	live	pictures
while	they	work.	The	“C-arm”	allows	the	doctor	to	rotate	the	direction
that	an	image	is	taken	to	provide	multiple	views	and	angles	of	the	area
under	study.	In	continuous	mode,	it	can	allow	the	doctor	to	see	the
movement	of	needles	or	dye	within	the	body.	This	is	used	to	perform
most	spinal	injections.
Carpal	bones:
	Bones	of	the	wrist	and	base	of	hand.
Case	manager:
	Usually	a	nurse	or	other	health	care	professional	that
works	for	an	insurance	company	to	help	coordinate	care	and	improve
communication	and	efficiency	of	treatment.
CAT	scan	(CT	scan):
	A	type	of	x-ray	machine	that	takes	multiple	images
and	then,	via	computer	programming,	summates	the	images	to	provide
specific	and	special	views	of	the	body.	Standard	CT	provides	two-
dimensional	information	regarding	the	anatomy	of	structures.	Recent
advances	now	allow	for	3D	reconstruction	using	CT	imaging.
Catheter:
	A	hollow	tube	that	doctors	use	to	deliver	fluid/medication	or,
in	some	circumstances,	drain	fluid	from	an	area	of	the	body.

--- PAGE 135 ---

Catheter	tip	granuloma:
	A	fibrous	nodule	or	scar	tissue	that	forms
around	the	tip	of	a	spinal	catheter.
Caudal	epidural	injections:
	An	injection	into	the	epidural	space	inside
the	tailbone	(sacrum).
Causalgia:
	Nerve	pain	that	arises	specifically	from	damaged	peripheral
nerves.
Celiac	plexus:
	A	group	of	nerves	within	the	abdomen	that	provides
nerve	supply	and	feeling	for	the	liver,	pancreas,	and	much	of	the
intestines.	This	nerve	is	frequently	destroyed	by	injecting	chemicals	in
the	treatment	of	cancer	pain	from	abdominal	organs	to	decrease	the
sensation	(feeling)	coming	from	that	area	of	the	body.
Central	nervous	system:
	The	brain	and	spinal	cord	(as	opposed	to	the
peripheral	nervous	system,	which	is	outside	the	brain	and	spine).
Cervical	vertebrae:
	Spinal	bones	of	the	neck.
Chemotherapy:
	Medications	used	to	treat	cancer	and	certain
rheumatologic	conditions.
Chiropractor:
	A	doctor	who	specializes	in	manipulation	of	joints	and
the	spine	to	bring	structures	back	into	normal	alignment,	thereby
treating	pain.
Chronic	pain:
	Pain	that	has	been	present	for	more	than	two	or	three
months,	or	beyond	the	expected	length	of	healing.
Claimant:
	An	injured	worker	who	has	made	a	claim	for	disability
compensation	or	health	care	benefits	from	a	workers	compensation
insurance	company.
Cluneal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	in	the	buttock	region.
Coccyx:
	The	tailbone.
Commissioners’	exam:
	An	exam	ordered	by	the	judge	or	commissioner

--- PAGE 136 ---

in	a	workers’	compensation	case.	Typically	performed	by	an	independent
physician.
Complex	regional	pain	syndrome	(CRPS):
	A	disorder	characterized	by
hyperactivity	of	the	nervous	system	that	usually	arises	from	a	nerve
injury.	It	is	often	a	particularly	painful	condition	that	can	severely
interrupt	normal	lifestyle.
“Contained”	herniation:
	A	disc	herniation	that	has	not	broken	through
the	outer	wall	(annulus)	of	the	disc.
Copayment	(copay):
	The	patient’s	portion	of	payment,	usually	a
specific	dollar	amount,	which	will	be	billed	repeatedly	until	the	patient
reaches	their	out-of-pocket	maximum	for	the	year.
Cryoneuroablation:
	A	procedure	that	freezes	peripheral	nerves	to	treat
pain.
Deductible:
	The	patient’s	payment	responsibility,	which	must	be	met
before	the	insurance	carrier	will	begin	to	make	any	payments.
Deep	peroneal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	and	motor
function	to	the	calf	and	foot.
Degeneration:
	Natural	aging	process.
Diagnostic	injection:
	An	injection	of	local	anesthetic	(numbing
medication)	that	helps	to	document	the	cause	of	pain.	A	positive
response	suggests	that	the	structure	is	causing	pain,	whereas	a	negative
response	suggests	it	is	not.
Diaphragm:
	The	main	breathing	muscle	of	the	body.	This	also	separates
the	abdomen	from	the	chest	internally.
Digital	nerves:
	Nerves	that	supply	sensation	to	the	fingers	and	toes.
Discs:
	The	shock	absorbers	between	the	bones	of	the	spine.
Disc	decompression:
	A	procedure	that	decreases	the	pressure	inside	of

--- PAGE 137 ---

the	disc	and	is	used	to	remove	a	disc	herniation	or	protrusion.
Disc	herniation	(disc	bulge):
	A	disc	that	protrudes	or	sticks	out
abnormally	and	which	usually	causes	pain	by	pushing	on,	or	touching,	a
nerve;	looks	like	a	bubble	on	the	side	wall	of	a	tire.
Discitis:
	An	infection	of	the	disc,	a	very	serious	condition	that	requires
immediate	attention.
Discogenic	pain:
	Pain	that	arises	from	the	intervertebral	disc	usually
associated	with	a	torn,	protruding,	and/or	degenerated	disc.
Discogram:
	A	diagnostic	test	that	allows	the	physician	to	determine	if	a
particular	disc	is	painful	by	applying	progressively	increasing	pressure
through	a	needle	to	the	center	of	the	disc	(see	
chapter	16
	for	a	full
description	of	this	diagnostic	test).
Disc	tear:
	A	crack	or	tear	of	the	outer	wall	(annulus)	of	the	disc,	which
can	allow	material	to	escape	from	the	center	of	the	disc.
Dry	needling:
	A	procedure	in	which	a	needle	is	placed	in	the	body
without	the	injection	of	medication.	A	technique	for	trigger	point
injections–typically	used	for	the	treatment	of	painful	muscle	spots.
Edema:
	Swelling	from	accumulation	of	fluid	in	body	tissues.
Electrocardiogram	(ECG):
	A	basic	test	that	looks	at	the	electrical
function	of	the	heart.
Electrodiagnostic	testing:
	A	general	term	that	describes	a	variety	of
tests	that	look	at	the	function	of	nerves.
Electromyography	(EMG):
	An	electrical	test	that	looks	at	whether
muscles	are	receiving	normal	nerve	supply.
Electrostimulation:
	The	stimulation	of	nerves	and	muscles.
Epidural	blood	patch:
	The	injection	of	blood	into	the	epidural	space	for
the	treatment	of	a	spinal	fluid	leak	(usually	created	by	a	needle	hole).

--- PAGE 138 ---

Epidural	space:
	A	potential	space	in	the	spine	which	physicians	use	to
deliver	medications	to	various	structures	(usually	nerves)	within	the
spine.
Extruded	herniation:
	A	disc	herniation	that	is	larger	than	its	base,	i.e.
mushroom-like	in	appearance.
Facet	joints:
	Paired	(one	on	each	side	of	the	body)	joints	of	the	spine
that	exist	at	each	and	every	spinal	level.	These	joints	participate	in	the
motion	of	the	spine.
Femoral	nerve:
	One	of	the	two	main	nerves	of	the	lower	extremity
(sciatic	is	the	other).
Fibroblasts:
	Cells	within	the	body	that	make	up	the	basic	structure	of
tissue	and	which	are	frequently	involved	in	remodeling	of	injuries.
Fluoroscopic	guidance:
	The	physician	uses	live	x-ray	pictures	to	guide
his	treatment.
Foot	drop:
	A	condition	caused	by	nerve	injury	in	the	leg	or	back,
resulting	in	the	foot	flopping	down	when	walking.	Patients	commonly
need	a	brace	to	prevent	tripping	and	falling.
Ganglia:
	A	collection	of	nerve	cells.
Ganglion	impar:
	A	collection	of	nerve	cells	that	lie	in	front	of	the
tailbone	and	sacrum.
Genitofemoral	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	the	groin	and	scrotal	or
labial	region	with	sensation.
Glucocorticosteroids:
	A	type	of	steroid	that	physicians	inject	to	reduce
inflammation.
Histamine:
	A	chemical	that	the	body	releases,	usually	related	to	allergic
reactions.
Humerus:
	The	bone	in	the	upper	arm.

--- PAGE 139 ---

Hypertrophy:
	Enlarged	or	overgrown.	As	in	a	joint	which	is	distorted	by
arthritis.
Hypogastric	plexus:
	A	group	of	nerves	that	lie	in	front	of	the	spine
where	it	joins	the	sacrum.
Independent	medical	examiner	(IME):
	An	examiner	who	is	expected
to	objectively	evaluate	the	patient,	usually	to	determine	if	the	treatment
the	physician	prescribes	is	appropriate	and	should	be	covered	by	the
insurance	company.
Intradiscal	electrothermal	annuloplasty	(IDET
®
):
	A	procedure	that
treats	pain	coming	from	the	disc,	related	to	tears	or	fissures	in	the	outer
wall	(annulus).
Infraorbital	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	to	facial	structures
below	the	eye	and	above	the	jaw.
Infrapatellar	saphenous	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	runs	along	the	inside	of
the	knee	and	that	is	most	frequently	damaged	during	knee	surgery.	This
nerve	supplies	sensory	function	to	the	front	of	the	knee.
Injectate:
	A	substance	to	be	injected	into	the	body.
Innervate:
	To	supply	nerve	feeling	to	an	area.
Insulin:
	A	natural	or	synthetic	compound	that	helps	the	body	control
metabolism	of	sugars.
Intercostal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	runs	under	the	rib	and	that	supplies
sensation	to	the	chest	wall.
Interstitial	cystitis:
	A	condition	affecting	the	bladder	that	can	cause
severe	pain.	Some	experts	think	this	is	analogous	to	complex	regional
pain	syndrome	(CRPS)	of	the	bladder.
Interventional	pain	management	(IPM):
	The	treatment	of	pain	using
injection	and	surgical	techniques.

--- PAGE 140 ---

Intra-articular	injection:
	An	injection	made	inside	the	joint.
Intradiscal	techniques:
	Procedures	that	treat	the	disc	by	operating
inside	the	disc.
Intrathecal	drug	delivery	system:
	A	device	that	delivers	medication
into	the	spinal	fluid,	usually	on	a	continuous	basis.
Ischemic	compression	(acupressure):
	A	treatment	that	is	similar	to
acupuncture,	but	uses	pressure	on	acupuncture	points	and	trigger	points.
Laser	assisted	spinal	endoscopy	(LASE):
	A	device	that	removes	disc
material	through	a	cannula,	under	direct	visualization	and	with	the
assistance	of	a	laser.
Lateral:
	Toward	the	left	or	right	side	of	the	body.
Lateral	calcaneal	nerve:
	A	sensory	nerve	around	the	outside	of	the
heel.
Lateral	epicondylitis:
	Also	known	as	‘tennis	elbow,’	this	is	a	condition
characterized	by	pain	and	tenderness	along	the	outside	of	the	elbow.
Lateral	recess:
	An	area	inside	the	spinal	canal	that	is	off	to	the	side.	The
disc	lies	anterior	and	the	facet	joint	lies	posterior	to	this	region.
Leaking	disc:
	A	disc	with	a	tear	that	goes	through	the	entire	outer	wall
(annulus)	and	allows	chemicals	within	the	disc	to	leak	out.	These
chemicals	usually	cause	irritation	or	inflammation	of	the	surrounding
structures.
Ligament:
	Tissue	that	connects	one	bone	to	another	bone,	providing
stability	of	joints.
Ligament	flavum:
	A	ligament	that	runs	along	the	back	of	the	spinal
canal	and	which	physicians	use	to	help	them	identify	the	epidural	space.
Overgrowth	of	this	ligament	can	cause	spinal	stenosis.
Local	anesthetic	phase:
	A	medication	that	is	injected	to	numb	the	area

--- PAGE 141 ---

or	nerve.
Long-acting	opioid:
	Pain	medications	with	a	sustained-release	formula
to	reduce	the	frequency	with	which	pills	must	be	taken.
Lumbar	vertebral	bones:
	Bones	of	the	spine	in	the	lower	back.
Medial	branch	block	(MBB):
	Injection	of	local	anesthetic	and	steroids
onto	the	nerves	of	the	facets.
Medial	calcaneal	nerve:
	A	sensory	nerve	that	lies	along	the	inside	of
the	heel.
Medical	marijuana:
	The	use	of	marijuana	for	medicinal	purposes.
Mental	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	exits	through	the	lower	jaw	(the	mandible)
and	which	supplies	sensation	to	the	skin	and	soft	tissues	over	the	jaw.
Metastases:
	Cancer	that	has	spread	to	areas	of	the	body	beyond	where
the	cancer	started.
Metastatic	bone	cancer:
	Cancer	that	has	spread	to	bone.
Mineralocorticoid	steroids:
	A	steroid	that	influences	salt	and	water
balance	in	the	body.
Morton’s	neuroma:
	an	overgrown	bundle	of	nerves	in	the	foot,	usually
between	the	third	and	fourth	toes.
Myelogram:
	A	diagnostic	test	that	involves	the	injection	of	dye	into	the
spinal	canal	to	identify	areas	of	nerve	compression.
Myofascial	pain	syndrome:
	Pain	that	involves	the	muscles	and	causes
trigger	points.
Neural	foramen:
	A	hole	or	space	in	the	spine	between	spinal	levels
(bones)	where	nerves	exit.
Neuraxial	medications:
	Medications	that	are	delivered	directly	into	the

--- PAGE 142 ---

spinal	fluid.
Neurologist:
	A	doctor	who	specializes	in	conditions	affecting	nerves.
Neurolytic:
	A	medication	or	chemical	that	destroys	nerves.
Neurosurgeon:
	A	physician	who	specializes	in	operating	on	the	brain
and	spine.
Nerve	conduction	study	(NCS):
	A	test	that	measures	how	well	nerves
conduct	impulses	in	the	body	(see	
chapter	5
)
Nucleoplasty
®
:
	A	treatment	that	is	performed	through	a	needle	to
decompress	a	disc	herniation.
Nucleotome
®
:
	A	treatment	that	decompresses	a	disc	herniation	via	a
small	hollow	tube.
Nucleus:
	The	center	of	a	structure.
Nucleus	pulposus:
	The	center	of	the	vertebral	disc.
Occipital	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	to	the	back	and	top	of
the	skull.
Occiput:
	The	back	and	base	of	the	skull.
Oncology:
	The	treatment	and	study	of	cancer.
Orthopedist:
	A	physician	who	specializes	in	the	surgical	and
nonsurgical	treatment	of	bone	and	joint	injuries.
Orthotics:
	A	device	that	is	placed	in	the	shoe	to	restore	normal
alignment.
Out-of-pocket	maximum:
	The	maximum	amount	of	money	that	a
patient	(or	family)	must	pay	for	health	care	in	one	year.
Palliative	treatment:
	Treatments	that	help	relieve	symptoms	but	do	not

--- PAGE 143 ---

cure	the	problem.
Palpation:
	To	feel	with	the	fingers	to	identify	a	problem.
Pancreas:
	An	organ	in	the	abdomen	that	secretes	chemicals	and
hormones	to	assist	with	digestion	and	blood	sugar	control.
Pancreatitis:
	Inflammation	or	irritation	of	the	pancreas,	usually	caused
by	alcohol,	drugs,	or	a	blockage	of	the	outflow	of	digestive	enzymes.
Patella:
	Knee	cap.	This	bone	slides	over	the	knee	as	the	joint	moves.
Peer-to-peer	review:
	When	one	doctor	with	a	similar	expertise	reviews
the	work	of	another	doctor	to	determine	the	appropriateness	of
treatment.	This	often	involves	a	conversation	between	the	treating	and
reviewing	physician.
Percutaneous:
	A	procedure	performed	through	the	skin,	without	cutting
open	the	body.
Percutaneous	endoscopic	discectomies:
	A	procedure	in	which	a	disc	is
removed	without	a	surgical	incision.
Peripheral	nerves:
	Nerves	outside	the	spinal	canal.
Periscapular:
	Between	the	shoulder	blades
Peritonitis:
	An	infection	of	the	abdominal	cavity.
Peroneal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	starts	behind	the	knee	and	runs	down	the
outside	of	the	leg	to	the	foot	and	which	provides	both	motor	function
and	sensation	to	the	leg.
Phantom-limb	pain:
	Pain	that	is	sensed	by	the	patient	in	a	structure
(usually	an	arm	or	leg)	that	has	been	lost	or	amputated.
Phenol:
	A	chemical	that	is	injected	to	destroy	nerves	and	treat	pain;
usually	reserved	for	the	treatment	of	cancer	pain.	It	is	also	used	to	treat
chronic	muscular	spasm	by	injecting	at	motor	endpoints.

--- PAGE 144 ---

Physiatrist:
	A	physician	who	specializes	in	the	treatment	and
rehabilitation	of	the	body.
Piriformis	muscle:
	The	muscle	in	the	buttock	which	lies	on	top	of	the
sciatic	nerve	and	helps	move	the	leg	outwards.
Plantar	fasciitis:
	Inflammation	or	irritation	of	the	bottom	of	the	foot
which	can	cause	severe	pain	with	walking.
Pneumothorax:
	Collapse	of	the	lung,	usually	caused	by	trauma	to	the
lung	surface	as	when	struck	by	a	needle	(like	a	balloon	with	a	hole,	the
air	will	leak	out	and	the	balloon	collapses).
Posterior:
	Towards	the	back	side	of	the	body.
Postdural	puncture	headaches:
	Headaches	that	are	caused	by	the	leak
of	spinal	fluid,	usually	following	insertion	of	a	needle	into	the	spinal
fluid.
Posterior	joint	syndrome:
	Pain	coming	from	both	the	lumbar	facet	and
sacroiliac	joints.
Prophylactic	antibiotics:
	Antibiotics	that	are	given	to	help	prevent
infection.
Pseudoradicular	symptoms:
	Symptoms	that	radiate	into	the	extremity,
but	are	not	caused	by	nerve	compression	in	the	spinal	canal.
Pseudosciatica:
	Similar	to	pseudoradicular	symptoms,	although
Pseudosciatica	specifically	refers	to	such	pain	in	the	leg.
Psoriatic	arthritis:
	An	arthritic	condition	that	is	associated	with
psoriasis	and	can	affect	multiple	joints	of	the	body,	but	commonly
involves	the	sacroiliac	joint.
Radial	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	and	motor	function	to
parts	of	the	arm	and	hand.
Radiation	neuritis:
	Irritation	or	damage	of	nerves	from	radiation,

--- PAGE 145 ---

commonly	seen	following	cancer	treatments.
Radiculopathy:
	Pain	from	a	nerve	that	is	irritated	or	compressed	inside
the	spinal	canal	or	as	it	exits	the	spinal	canal.
Radiofrequency	ablation	(RFA):
	Use	of	electrical	energy	to	kill	nerves.
Rectus	abdominus:
	Vertical	abdominal	muscles	that	run	from	the
breastbone	to	the	pelvis.	Also	known	as	the	“six-pack”.
Referred	pain:
	Pain	that	is	sensed	by	the	patient	in	an	area	that	is
removed	(away)	from	the	area	of	injury.
Reiter’s	syndrome:
	Also	known	as	reactive	arthritis,	this	condition	is	a
form	of	inflammatory	arthritis.
Retro-orbital:
	Behind	the	eyes.
Respiratory	depression:
	Decreased	breathing	drive	or	decreased	rate	of
breathing;	as	can	occur	with	drug	overdose.
Sacroiliac	joint:
	A	joint	of	the	pelvis	between	the	iliac	bone	and
sacrum.
Sacroiliitis:
	Inflammation	of	the	sacroiliac	joint.
Saphenous	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	runs	along	the	inside	of	the	thigh	and
calf,	ending	in	the	foot,	and	which	supplies	sensation	to	these	parts	of
the	leg.
Sciatica:
	A	generic	term	used	by	many	people	to	mean	different	things.
“True	sciatica”	involves	irritation	of	the	sciatic	nerve,	but	many	people
incorrectly	use	this	term	synonymously	with	radiculopathy.
Sciatic	nerve:
	The	largest	nerve	in	the	body.	This	nerve	runs	from	the
buttock	to	behind	the	knee	where	it	turns	into	the	common	peroneal
nerve.	The	sciatic	nerve	supplies	important	motor	function	and	sensation
to	the	leg.

--- PAGE 146 ---

Short-acting	opioid:
	A	narcotic	pain	medication	that	typically	lasts
between	three	and	six	hours.
Spinal	canal:
	The	hole	or	tube	that	runs	inside	the	spine	from	the	skull
to	the	sacrum	and	contains	the	spinal	cord,	nerves,	and	spinal	fluid.
Spinal	decompression	therapy:
	A	physical	medicine	treatment	that
places	traction	on	the	spine	to	treat	disorders	of	the	spine.
Spinal	drug	delivery	system:
	A	device	that	infuses	medications	into	the
spinal	fluid.
Spinal	stenosis:
	Narrowing	of	the	spinal	canal;	commonly	caused	by	the
overgrowth	of	bone	or	ligaments	around	the	spine.
Spondylolisthesis:
	A	condition	where	one	bone	of	the	spine	slips	on	top
of	the	other	so	that	they	are	no	longer	in	proper	alignment.
Stellate	ganglion:
	A	group	of	nerves	that	supplies	specialized	nerve
function	(autonomic	sympathetic	nerves)	to	the	upper	quadrant	of	the
body	(arm	and	face	on	one	side).
Stem	cells:
	Cells	that	can	differentiate	into	multiple	different	types	of
tissue	in	the	body.
Subarachnoid:
	The	space	inside	the	spinal	canal	where	the	spinal	fluid,
nerves,	and	spinal	cord	reside.
Superior	gluteal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	to	the	buttocks.
Supraorbital	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	to	the	area	over	the
eyes	(the	forehead).
Suprascapular	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	some	of	the	shoulder
muscles	with	motor	function.	This	nerve	is	also	felt	to	have	some	pain
sensation	properties.
Superficial	peroneal	nerve:
	A	nerve	that	supplies	sensation	to	the
inside,	top	of	the	foot.

--- PAGE 147 ---

Sympathetic	nerves:
	A	part	of	the	autonomic	nervous	system	that
controls	functions	such	as	sweating	and	blood	vessel	caliber.	This	system
is	activated	in	the	fight-or-flight	response.
Synthetic	opioid:
	An	opioid	that	does	not	exist	in	nature,	but	is	created
by	pharmaceutical	manufacturing.
Tendonitis:
	A	condition	characterized	by	inflammation	of	the	tendon.
Transcutaneous	electrical	nerve	stimulation	(TENS)	units:
	A	variety
of	topical	electrical	stimulating	devices.
Transitional	segments:
	An	abnormal	connection	of	the	spine	and
sacrum	where	there	are	too	many	or	too	few	lumbar	spinal	bones.
Ultrasound:
	A	device	that	looks	into	the	body	using	ultrasound	waves.
Reflection	of	the	waves	off	of	tissue	are	measured	by	the	device	and
converted	into	images,	allowing	the	physician	to	look	at	soft	tissues	and
nerves	without	radiation	exposure.
Ulnar	nerve:
	One	of	the	nerves	that	supplies	the	arm	and	hand	with
sensation	and	motor	function,	including	the	ring	and	pinky	fingers.
Vasoconstriction:
	A	condition	in	which	a	blood	vessel	narrows,
decreasing	the	amount	of	blood	flow	to	the	area	that	it	supplies.
Vasomotor	changes:
	Changes	in	the	appearance	of	an	extremity	that
are	caused	by	changes	in	blood	flow.	Increased	flow	makes	the	area	red
and	hot,	while	decreased	flow	makes	it	pale	and	cold.
Wet	tap	(dural	puncture):
	When	an	epidural	needle	accidentally
penetrates	the	dura,	this	can	cause	a	spinal	headache	if	too	much	spinal
fluid	leaks	from	the	hole.
Zygapophyseal	joints:
	Paired	joints	(one	on	each	side)	that	separate
each	vertebral	bone	from	the	next	(except	between	the	first	and	second
vertebral	bodies).	Movement	at	the	spinal	level	occurs	at	these	joints.

--- PAGE 148 ---

ONLINE	RESOURCES
American	Chronic	Pain	Association	(ACPA)
(
www.theacpa.org
)
This	site	helps	facilitate	peer	support	and	education	for	individuals	with
chronic	pain	and	their	families	so	that	these	individuals	may	live	more
fully	in	spite	of	their	pain.
American	Pain	Foundation
(
www.painfoundation.org
)
Founded	in	1997,	the	American	Pain	Foundation	(APF)	is	an
independent	nonprofit	organization	that	serves	people	affected	by	pain.
APF	speaks	out	for	people	living	with	pain,	caregivers,	health	care
providers	and	allied	organizations,	working	together	to	dismantle	the
barriers	that	impede	access	to	quality	pain	care	for	all.	The	American
Pain	Foundation	educates,	supports,	and	advocates	for	people	affected
by	pain.
American	Society	of	Interventional	Pain	Physicians	(ASIPP)
(
www.asipp.org
)
The	American	Society	of	Interventional	Pain	Physicians	(ASIPP)	was
formed	in	1998	with	the	goal	of	promoting	the	development	and
practice	of	safe,	high-quality	yet	cost-effective	interventional	pain
management	techniques	for	the	diagnosis	and	treatment	of	pain	and
related	disorders,	and	to	ensure	patient	access	to	these	interventions.
The	ASIPP	is	a	not-for-profit	organization	representing	interventional
pain	physicians	across	the	country.
Boston	Scientific
(
www.controlyourpain.com
)
This	site	provides	patients	with	information	on	Boston	Scientifics’
products	such	as	Precision.	It	also	has	information	on	reimbursement	for

--- PAGE 149 ---

the	patient	that	might	be	helpful	for	them	as	they	go	forward	with	an
SCS	device.
Medtronic	Pain	Therapies
(
www.tamethepain.com
)
This	site	provides	information	on	Medtronic	pain	therapies,	including
patient	testimonials,	an	overview	of	how	neurostimulation	therapy
works,	and	answers	to	commonly	asked	questions.
Race	Against	Pain
(
www.raceagainstpain.com
)
This	Boston	Scientific	site	allows	patients	to	connect	with	other	patients
regarding	questions	on	pain	and	alternatives	that	have	helped	others.	It
is	an	active	forum	that,	although	sponsored	by	Boston	Scientific,	is	very
open	about	all	modalities	and	companies.	The	goal	is	to	allow	the
patients	to	tell	their	own	story	in	their	own	words.
St.	Jude	Medical	Neuromodulation
(
www.poweroveryourpain.com
)
This	is	a	patient	education	website,	sponsored	by	St.	Jude	Medical,
where	you	can	locate	an	interventional	pain	physician,	request	a	spinal
cord	stimulation	(SCS)	information	kit,	and	watch	videos	from	patients
who	live	with	these	systems.

--- PAGE 150 ---

Figure	4.1
Spinal	anatomy	from	neck	to	tailbone.	2011.	Used	with	permission	of	Elsevier.	All	rights
reserved.

--- PAGE 151 ---

Figure	4.2
Disc	herniation	pushing	on	a	nerve.
Figure	4.3	a
Foraminal	or	nerve	opening	stenosis.

--- PAGE 152 ---

Figure	4.3	b
Normal	central	canal	size	(a	white	line	is	drawn	around	the	margins	of	the	spinal	canal).
Figure	4.3	c
MRI	showing	central	and	lateral	recess	stenosis	(a	white	line	is	drawn	around	the	margins	of	the
spinal	canal).

--- PAGE 153 ---

Figure	4.4
Epidural	space	and	contents.	Reproduced	from	
Gray’s	Anatomy,	39th	ed.
,	Susan	Standring,
Copyright	Elsevier	(2005).

--- PAGE 154 ---

Figure	4.5
Facet	joints.

--- PAGE 155 ---

Figure	4.6
Facet	nerves.	Courtesy	of	The	American	Society	of	Interventional	Pain	Physicians,	from
Manchikanti	et	al.	
Interventional	Techniques	in	Non-Spinal	Pain,	2009
,	ASIPP	Publishing,	Paducah,
KY

--- PAGE 156 ---

Figure	4.7
Sacroiliac	joint.


--- PAGE 157 ---

Figure	4.8
Mechanisms	of	sacroiliac	joint	injury	from	car	accident	or	slip	and	fall.	Used	with	permission
from	
Ligament	and	Tendon	Relaxation	Treated	by	Prolotherapy
.	Beulah	Land	Press,	2002,	Oak	Park,
IL.
Figure	4.9
An	abnormal	overgrowth	of	bone	on	side	of	the	spine	attaching	part	of	the	lowest	vertebral	body
to	the	sacrum.	(This	is	a	common	congenital	abnormality	known	as	a	transitional	segment.)
Figure	5.1

--- PAGE 158 ---

Low	back	x-ray	showing	an	abnormal	overgrowth	of	arthritic	bone	on	one	side	of	the	spine
(“bone	spur”).
Figures	5.2	a
MRI	lumbar	spine	showing	mild	disc	bulging,	cross	section	or	axial	view.
Figure	5.2	b
MRI	(herniated	disc)—head-to-toe	slice	(sagittal).	Disc	herniation	can	be	seen	at	the	lowest	disc
level	(black	structure	protruding	into	white	spinal	fluid).

--- PAGE 159 ---

Figure	5.3
Normal	CT	scan	of	low	back.	Note	the	better	bone	detail,	but	less	clear	soft	tissue	detail
compared	to	
Figure	5.2a
	(cross	section).
Figure	5.4
Bone	scan.	Dark	areas	represent	areas	of	arthritis.

--- PAGE 160 ---

Figure	8.1
Trigger	point	pattern	of	pain	that	mimics	in	distribution	the	lower	extremity	radiating	symptoms
that	are	seen	with	a	disc	herniation	but	for	which	there	is	a	different	cause.	(X=trigger	point,
shaded	area	is	the	distribution	where	the	pain	is	usually	experienced.)


--- PAGE 161 ---

Figure	9.1
Nerves	of	the	head	and	face.	2011.	Used	with	permission	of	Elsevier.	All	rights	reserved.
Figure	9.2
Nerves	of	the	upper	extremity.	(Hadzic,	A.,	Vloka,	J.,	
Peripheral	Nerve	Blocks
,	
©
2004,	McGraw-
Hill)	Reproduced	with	permission	of	The	McGraw-Hill	Companies.

--- PAGE 162 ---

Figure	9.3
Nerves	of	the	chest,	abdomen,	and	pelvis.	2011.	Used	with	permission	of	Elsevier.	All	rights
reserved.

--- PAGE 163 ---

Figure	9.4
Many	different	structures	can	cause	pain	to	refer	into	or	down	the	leg;	this	is	referred	to	as
“pseudosciatica”.	This	diagram	shows	some	of	these	structures.	Credit:	Luis	N.	Hernandez,	M.D.
Figure	9.5
Nerves	of	the	back	and	sacrum.

--- PAGE 164 ---

Figure	9.6
Nerves	of	the	lower	extremity.	Courtesy	of	The	American	Society	of	Interventional	Pain
Physicians,	from	Manchikanti	et	al.	
Interventional	Techniques	in	Non-Spinal	Pain
,	2009,	ASIPP
Publishing,	Paducah,	KY

--- PAGE 165 ---

Figure	10.1	a
Lumbar	interlaminar	epidural	(front	to	back	view).
Figure	10.1	b
Lumbar	interlaminar	epidural	(side	view).	Needle	positioned	in	epidural	space,	dye	has	been
injected	and	is	spreading	in	the	posterior	epidural	space.

--- PAGE 166 ---

Figure	10.2
Lumbar	transforaminal	epidural.	Dye	spreading	along	nerve	root	and	proximally	into	the	lateral
recess	of	the	epidural	space.
Figure	10.3	a
Caudal	epidural	injection.	Reproduced	from	
Gray’s	Anatomy,	39th	ed.
,	Susan	Standring,	Copyright
Elsevier	(2005).

--- PAGE 167 ---

Figure	10.3	b
Caudal	epidural	injection	x-ray.	Needle	positioned	in	the	caudal	canal	with	dye	spreading	in	the
epidural	space	(lateral	view).
Figure	10.4
Cervical	epidural	with	catheter	technique,	see	dye	spreading	along	the	nerve	after	it	exits	the	tip
of	the	catheter.

--- PAGE 168 ---

Figure	12.1	a
Muscles	around	the	sacroiliac	joint.	Used	with	permission	from	
Ligament	and	Tendon	Relaxation
Treated	by	Prolotherapy
.	Beulah	Land	Press,	2002,	Oak	Park,	IL.

--- PAGE 169 ---

Figure	12.1	b
Ligaments	around	the	sacroiliac	joint.
IL	=	iliolumbar	ligament
SS	=	sacrospinatus
ST	=	sacrotuberous
SI	-	sacroiliac
SN	=	sciatic	nerve
Used	with	permission	from	
Ligament	and	Tendon	Relaxation	Treated	by	Prolotherapy
.	Beulah	Land
Press,	2002,	Oak	Park,	IL.

--- PAGE 170 ---

Figure	12.2
Sacroiliac	joint	injection	(dye	seen	spreading	along	the	inside	of	the	joint	space).
Figure	14.1	a
Adhesiolysis.	(Note	filling	defect	on	the	right	at	the	tip	of	the	catheter.)	Manchikanti	L,	Singh	V
(ed).	
Interventional	Techniques	in	Chronic	Spinal	Pain
.	Pg	495.	2007,	ASIPP	Publishing,	Paducah,
KY.

--- PAGE 171 ---

Figure	14.1	b
Adhesiolysis.	Note	dye	filling	the	defect	after	the	scar	tissue	has	been	broken	up	(lysed).
Manchikanti	L,	Singh	V	(ed).	
Interventional	Techniques	in	Chronic	Spinal	Pain
.	Pg	495.	2007,	ASIPP
Publishing,	Paducah,	KY.
Figure	16.1
Discogram.	Note	dye	spreading	within	the	disc,	the	three	discs	show	varying	degrees	of
degeneration	as	evidenced	by	the	variable	pattern	of	dye	spread	within	the	disc.

--- PAGE 172 ---

Figure	17.1	a
Nucleotome.	A	reverberating	blade	within	the	cannula	cuts	off	pieces	of	disc	that	are	vacuumed
into	the	cannulas	side	wall.	Photo	provided	courtesy	of	Clarus	Medical.


--- PAGE 173 ---

Figure	17.1	b
Acutherm.	The	ACUTHERM™	Decompression	Catheter	features	a	heating	coil	designed	to	treat
disc	bulges	or	herniations	directly.	ACUTHERM™	Targeted	Disc	Decompression	compliments	of
NeuroTherm.
Figure	17.1	c
Nucleoplasty.	This	procedure	removes	disc	material	by	creating	channels	within	the	disc	using
radiofrequency	energy,	vaporizing	disc	material	which	leaves	the	needle	as	a	gas.	Photo	provided
courtesy	of	ArthroCare
®
	Corporation.
Figure	17.1	d
IDET.	By	inserting	the	SPINECATH™	Intradiscal	Catheter	into	the	annulus	of	the	affected	disc,
physicians	can	apply	controlled	levels	of	thermal	energy	to	treat	cracks	and	fissures	in	the	disc.
SPINECATH	Intradiscal	ELECTROTHERMAL™	Therapy	compliments	of	NeuroTherm.

--- PAGE 174 ---

Figure	17.1	e
LASE.	LASE	allows	direct	visualization	of	the	inside	of	the	disc	to	assist	with	mechanical
decompression	using	both	a	laser	and	grasping	forceps	to	remove	disc	material	from	the	nucleus.
Photo	provided	courtesy	of	Clarus	Medical.
Figure	17.1	f
Dekompressor.	This	procedure	uses	a	rotating	wand	with	screw-type	threads	positioned	along	the
tip.	The	threads	catch	the	disc	material	and	then	pull	it	back	into	the	needle	for	removal	of	disc
material.	Photo	provided	courtesy	of	Stryker	Interventional	Spine.
Figure	17.1	g
Biacuplasty.	This	procedure	involves	placing	one	needle	into	each	side	of	the	disc	and	then

--- PAGE 175 ---

creating	an	area	of	radiofrequency	energy	between	the	needles	to	seal	annular	tears	and
denervate	the	inner	annulus	between	the	needles.	
©
Kimberly-Clark	Worldwide,	Inc.	Used	with
permission.
Figure	18.1
Chronic	regional	pain	syndrome	(CRPS)	of	the	left	hand.	(Note	shiny	skin,	swelling	and
discoloration.)


--- PAGE 176 ---

Figure	19.1
Acute	herpes	zoster	or	shingles.	(Note	rash	in	a	band-like	distribution	extending	from	the	back
into	the	upper	arm,	following	a	right	T2	distribution.)
Figure	20.1
Spinal	cord	stimulator	(three	leads	positioned	in	the	spinal	canal	to	treat	back	and	leg	pain).

--- PAGE 177 ---

Figure	20.2
Spinal	drug	delivery	system.	Note	pump	in	the	left	abdomen	with	a	catheter	(yellow	line)
running	from	the	pump,	around	the	flank,	and	then	into	the	spinal	canal.	
Courtesy	of	Medtronic,
Inc
.